Climate change, water stress, conflict and migration

Contents

Climate change, conflict and migration: the water context
Conference summary
Karin Thomas, Marguerite de Chaisemartin and
Michael van der Valk
Climate change, water stress, conflict and migration
Taking stock of current insights through a vulnerability
lens
Leon Hermans
Climate change, water stress, conflict and migration
Background paper
Climate change-induced migrations
A research and capacity-building agenda from a human
security perspective
Rolain Borel
Water stress, conflict and migration in South Asia
Major General ANM Muniruzzaman (Retd)
Environment, climate change and human displacement
From literature, through empirical evidence to policymaking
Tamer Afifi
Letter to the Netherlands Chief Negotiator UN Climate
Talks, Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment
Marius Enthoven

1

13

35

77

87

101

113

vii

Climate change, conflict and migration:
the water context
Conference summary
Karin Thomas, Marguerite de Chaisemartin and Michael van der Valk

The symposium – held on 21 September 2011 at the International Institute of Social Studies, The Hague, The Netherlands –
was opened by the Chair, Mr Marius Enthoven, Chairman of the
Alliance for UPEACE. He requested a moment of silence in
remembrance of the late Mr Mahmoud El Zain Hamid, a professor
of the University of Peace (UPEACE), and honoured his efforts and
commitment to sharing knowledge.
Mr Enthoven announced the opening of a UPEACE office in The
Hague in 2012.

Session 1 – Introduction to the symposium
Professor Rolain Borel, PhD, of the Department of Environment,
Peace and Security at UPEACE, San José, Costa Rica, provided an
update on UPEACE in Costa Rica, highlighting the multicultural
student body and its positive impact on the learning environment.
Through a series of cartoons on climate change, the message was
clear: today not everybody sees the urgency, and the ones who
might see it talk instead of taking any real action.
Mr Borel went on to stress three key associations that require further consideration: climate change and human rights, disaster prevention and research, and disasters and conflict data. Closer links
Karin Thomas is director of Thomas Consulting – Responsible Investments, Tilburg, the
Netherlands. Marguerite de Chaisemartin is legal consultant at UNESCO’s PCCP programme
(From Potential Conflict to Cooperation Potential). Michael van der Valk is Scientific Secretary
of the Netherlands National Committee IHP-HWRP, the Dutch governmental advisory body
for the intergovernmental water programmes of UNESCO and WMO.

1

between climate change and human rights need to be identified,
including the right to live and to migrate. He also questioned why
migrations are often considered negative. Disaster prevention
could feature more prominently in policy-making agendas for climate change, and disasters should be used as a learning tool.
Proper data of disasters and conflict is also necessary to ensure
good research in this field.
Major-General (ret.) A.N.M. Muniruzzaman, President of the
Bangladesh Institute of Peace and Security Studies (BIPSS),
Dhaka, Bangladesh, began his presentation by showing the international response to climate change by citing the UN Security
Council (20 July 2011) and the UN Secretary-General Ban Kimoon.
Since Bangladesh is trapped between the Himalayas in the north
and the encroaching Bay of Bengal to the south, it is vulnerable to
natural disasters due to the frequency of extreme climate events
and its high population density. The impacts of higher temperatures, more variable precipitation, more extreme weather events,
and sea-level rise are already felt in Bangladesh and will continue
to intensify. Climate change in Bangladesh will induce water crisis
and large-scale migration and thereby reinforce present trends of
instability and conflict while at the same time draw new lines of
conflict. For Bangladesh there is no time to talk about climate
change anymore, action is needed. 35 Million people are becoming
climate migrants, and Bangladesh itself will be too small to accommodate all these migrating people. Migrating people from Bangladesh want to go to India, but they currently risk being killed if they
are seen close to the Indian border as India wants to prevent
Bangladeshi people from entering their country.
Mr Muniruzzaman put forward two kinds of securities that are
needed in reacting to climate change:
1 Hard security: socio-political and economic unrest, radicalization
and terrorism, resource conflict, inter and/or intra-state conflict
potentials, State collapse, and regional conflicts;

2

2 Human security: water, food, livelihood, health (including water
borne diseases), disaster, and energy.
In relation to environmentally induced migration, Dr Tamer Afifi
of the United Nations University, Institute for Environment and
Human Security, Bonn, Germany, identified three types of
migrants:
1 Environmentally Motivated Migrants who ‘may leave’ a steadily
deteriorating environment to pre-empt the worst;
2 Environmentally Forced Migrants who ‘have to leave’ to avoid
inevitable and grave consequences of environmental degradation;
3 Environmental Emergency Migrants who ‘flee’ the worst of an
environmental impact to save their lives.
Mr Afifi showed different case studies from Lake Chad, Mexico,
Guatemala and Niger. In Niger, seasonal migration – cattle herding – has become permanent and migration is now crossing the
national borders. Drought led to deforestation and overgrazing the
land, which led to land degradation. Due to this land degradation
the sand siltation also increased, thus negatively impacting lakes
and fishes, so fisherman also had to migrate. Canals are now being
dug by women and children. The Government is trying to increase
water levels to promote fisheries and to attract men to the region
again. Mr Afifi mentioned land ownership as a tool against migration: if people owned the land instead of renting it, they would stay
longer at a certain place instead of becoming a migrant. He also
argued that language has an impact on migration.
The Chair opened the floor for discussion.
Mr Muniruzzaman was asked whether situations of non-climate
change, and where the situation is already difficult, should not also
be taken into account. He responded that indeed the potential for
problems already existed but climate change made it worse, therefore the two situations are overlapping. When asked whether these
challenges would not be a solution in disguise for downstream
countries as enormous floods would be made available to them, he

3

said it is not true for glaciers and deltas, as the solution of storing
water is not feasible ecologically. When his argument for building
the capacity of the military was questioned, he explained that this is
important for fragile countries with weak institutions and that – in
consideration of the time required for capacity-building – it is
important to start the process in advance to be prepared. The military has to be considered as a capacity of the State and all capacities
of the State need to be involved.
According to Mr Muniruzzaman the pending climate-induced
migration from Bangladesh calls for a regional and international
framework. He questioned the internal capacity of India, as an
already overcrowded country, to absorb millions and millions of
people. He also referred to the planned electrified fence between
Bangladesh and India as an illustration of the tensions and suspicions regarding climate change migrations, and an issue that
should be considered at the level of the whole region.
In addressing a question on water as a tool of power manipulation, Mr Muniruzzaman recalled that riparian countries are not
considered equally in the region, where India is one of the two
hegemons with China. He highlighted however China’s increased
receptivity to regional negotiations related, among others, to ecological considerations.
Mr Borel was asked on the issue of climate change migration
and if it was to be seen from the point of view of the State or of
human rights. He recalled that indeed negotiation mostly concerns
State interests, and that the security of the people opposed to state
security must be put forward. He maintained that greater political
will and building a framework at the transboundary and regional
level is needed to avoid a destabilizing crisis. South Asia is a highrisk region where the symptoms of tension in this nuclear zone
would be very risky.

4

Session 2 – Different perspectives of the symposium theme
(Moderated by Mr Wouter Veening, Chairman of the Institute for Environmental Security, The Hague, Netherlands)
Dr Michele Nori, Programme Officer at EuropeAID of the European Commission (Brussels, Belgium), highlighted three main
issues: (a) the uncertainty and unpredictability of climate change;
(b) the need to increase capacities to access services in the Horn of
Africa and Sahara region; and (c) the fact that climate change,
although well known, is not recognised as the main problem by
people in the region. While the agricultural system that best deals
with climate change is pastoralism, this system however now has
to deal with extreme poverty. In the Horn of Africa, pastoral people
suffer from decreased access to territories, markets and to services
that would lead to diversity. For them, climate change – like
drought – is not the problem, it is these other restrictions.
Dr Karen Witsenburg, Policy Advisor at Both ENDS (Amsterdam,
the Netherlands) said that research shows that the number of violent incidents was higher during the wet season than during the
dry season, with a low during extreme drought. She added that
there is no evidence that climate change will lead to violence and
insecurity. Climate change may be related to natural disasters and
violence but climate variability is less harmful than natural disasters. Ms Witsenburg underlined that people are more inclined to
cooperate in times of scarcity, not the contrary, and that people live
in marginalized areas, drought and flood-prone areas, not because
they are poor but because they were initially already marginalized
because of political issues. They should therefore be called political
refugees instead of climate change refugees.
Mr Joep van Mierlo, Director of Vétérinaires Sans Frontières
(Brussels, Belgium) stated that a good farmer will never deteriorate
his own land, unless there are political, economical, or environmental obstacles. Water is not an issue, but access to water is. He
referred to a vaccination programme for children in Sudan by
UNICEF and Médecins Sans Frontières. In this case, pastoralists
did not want to have their own children vaccinated if the livestock

5

was not healthy – if the livestock died then children would have
nothing to eat. He stressed the importance of preserving indigenous knowledge, substantiated by external knowledge. Pastoral
field schools have been developed.
Early warning systems – ones that predict drought – are highly
important. Early warning response is needed, to move away from
reacting to a problem to preventing a disaster from happening. The
situation in the Horn of Africa is a case in point; the disaster was
known a year beforehand (pastoralists had been gone further – and
longer – away with their herds, leaving woman, children and elderly people) but nothing was done. The amount of the aid to pastoralism also needs to be readjusted, as pastoralism is an important
contributor to the wealth of the nation but only receives 1% of aid.
Dr Thanh-Dam Truong, Associate Professor of Women, Gender
and Development Studies at the International Institute for Social
Studies (The Hague, the Netherlands), suggested that there are too
many assumptions concerning migration and greater emphasis
needs to be placed on how we understand migration. Sometimes
something is called migration, while it actually is ‘moving’. She
also underlined the huge issue of human trafficking in Southeast
Asia. Science has the capacity to predict, and therefore it is an
important element in informing proper decision-making.
Dr Maarten Kappelle, Chief Conservation Officer for Biodiversity at
WWF Netherlands (Zeist, the Netherlands), mentioned sea-level
rise and the related issues affecting forests, droughts, flooding and
declining fish stocks. Greater emphasis is needed on risk management, and consideration of the environmental, economic, political or social issues. Mr Kappelle identified several case studies of
the impact of climate change on wildlife: in India, where moving
wildlife has put pressure on the people in local villages as their
wildlife is leaving their territories; in the Pacific, where coral bleach
has a great impact on local fisheries and the tourism industry; in
Borneo, where forest droughts have led to the endangerment of
Orangutans; and in Mozambique, where the man-made dam of the
Sambesi River that provides South Africa with hydro-power has

6

impacted eco-tourism and agriculture in the region. Mr Kappelle
mentioned solutions could include implementing a Climate
Change Adaptation strategy (a report has been published); reforestation, using mangroves; and a tourism programme with sea turtles.

Session 3 – Preparation for afternoon group work
Mr Alexander Flavell, Policy Liaison and Project Development
Coordinator at the International Organization for Migration (Brussels, Belgium) focused on the legislation and policy challenges
associated with climate change and migration. He claimed that the
human security approach is the best way to address security, starting from the individual perspective: physical, food and water.

Session 4 – Group discussion on recommendations
The participants broke into four working groups to discuss and
formulate recommendations on the following four areas:
Group 1: Legal
Group 2: Policy
Group 3: Capacity development
Group 4: Best practice

Session 5 – Symposium recommendations
Group 1: Legal recommendations
(Presented by Ms Mariëlle Matthee, Associated Researcher at
T.M.C. Asser Institute, The Hague, the Netherlands)
1 Define the ‘environmental migrant’ in practical terms.
2 Climate change should be included in international law as a
threat to peace and security.
3 The UN Security Council should include climate change threats
to peace and security within its mandate as a high priority.

7

4 The UN should take the initiative to establish the rights of
environmental migrants, thereby ending the ongoing discussions as to whether this can be best achieved through a new convention, a protocol under the 1951 Refugee Convention, by
reinterpreting the current refugee regime or through incorporation into the UNFCCC regime.
5 A legal framework for environmental migrants should contain a
set of principles for rights and duties, acknowledge different
categories of environmental migrants, and designate institutions
for dealing with environmental migrants.

Group 2: Policy recommendations
(Presented by Mr Wouter Veening)
1 The challenge of environmental migrants has to be identified
locally and regionally in time and space in order to facilitate preventive actions and adaptation by governments, businesses and
other parties involved, by setting up early warning systems and
constructing easy to read risk maps.
2 All countries vulnerable to considerable adverse effects of climate change should prioritise prevention and risk reduction in
their development policies, disaster relief programmes and management of their ecosystems.
3 The UN should continue to promote the development of
arrangements for local and regional eco-services and disseminate the results of practical application of eco-services as preventive measures against adverse effects of climate change.
4 The UNFCCC climate change negotiators in Durban (November
2011) should be encouraged to make progress on the Cancun
Adaptation Framework in order to make timely and appropriate
instruments available to prevent conflicts from climate change
and to be able to deal with large-scale environmental migration.
5 Use the financial crisis as an opportunity to come to new forms
of global social and ecological solidarity.

8

Group 3: Capacity development recommendations
(Presented by Mr Michael van der Valk, Scientific Secretary,
National Committee IHP-HWRP (UNESCO and WMO), the
Netherlands)
1 National governments and international development agencies
should mainstream climate change and adaptation policies in
order to prevent disaster and conflicts from the effects of climate
change, and employ unorthodox ways of learning and training to
build capacities in the various components of their societies for
handling these effects.
2 Governments, in cooperation with NGOs, scientists and other
stakeholders, have an active role to play in raising the awareness
of their population about climate change and water stress and
what can be done to manage the adverse effects. A carefully
designed approach is needed to engage the population, appealing to their aspirations and with clear actions.
3 Governments should implement policies that guarantee equal
access to water resources in dealing with the effects of climate
change. When countries share water resources they should create mutual agreements with institutions to provide fair water
management and avoid conflicts.

Group 4: Best practice recommendations
(Presented by Mr Henk van Schaik, Programme Coordinator,
Cooperative Programme on Water and Climate, The Hague, the
Netherlands)
1 The UN (UNEP, UNDP, UNU, UNFCCC) together with other
relevant bodies should collect and codify best practices in the
area of mitigating the adverse effects of climate change (water
stress, conflict and migration) and make them easily accessible.
2 The following cases are recommended as an example for
developing specific best practices:
i Disaster preparedness, resilience building and poverty alleviation: policy initiatives by the Government of Mozambique;

9

ii Community-based disaster management: Red Cross and Red
Crescent experiences in the Philippines;
iii Early warning systems: climatic alarm experiences in Bangladesh involving large groups of volunteers;
iv Water security: irrigation system investment programmes by
the Indian Government, and recent experiences with equal
access to water policies in South Africa.

Session 6 – Closing remarks, short reflections on the day and next
steps
Mr Borel expressed his interest to incorporate the following elements into teaching at the University for Peace:
1 Develop learning related to displacement and migration due to
climate change.
2 Prepare graduates to work in a variable, uncertain, unpredictable
environment.
3 Encourage students to be aware of assumptions (which may not
be true).
4 Foster greater inclusion of law department.
5 Emphasise risk reduction and adaptation.
6 Identify cooperation at local, international and multi-levels.
7 Strengthen capacities for leadership for change in conjunction
with social networks, and awareness of the structural frameworks needed for these human resources to be effective.
8 Encourage students to “wiki” their experiences on climate
change.
Mr Muniruzzamans’ closing remarks comprised of five clear messages:
1 Acknowledge the urgency of the issue.
2 Involve and train the next generation to prevent climate degradation.
3 Develop a broad vision in conjunction with local, regional and
global approaches.
4 Appeal for implementable practices.
5 Encourage a wider dissemination of information.

10

Mr Afifi recalled that natural disasters not only affect developing
countries, referring to the tsunami in 2004 and hurricane Katrina.
This increases the awareness of the problem, and involves more
and more people in the debate. Action is needed.
Mr Enthoven thanked the participants and concluded the symposium. He announced that the recommendations will be published
in hardcopy format and online.

11

12

Climate change, water stress, conflict
and migration
Taking stock of current insights through a
vulnerability lens
Leon Hermans

Introduction
There is a growing awareness in international policy circles that
climate change may be a driver of increased migration flows. In
addition to political refugees and economic migrants, climate
change-induced migration and environmental migrants are
increasingly recognized as categories in human migration. As climate change-induced migration is a relatively new phenomenon,
there is little established policy or legislation on how to deal with
the associated pressures and how to address the needs and rights
of environmental migrants. International decision-making on climate change and its impacts would need to address these new
emerging issues.
A prerequisite for well-informed international and national decision-making on climate-induced migration is a better understanding of the phenomenon. It is plausible that the four terms of climate change, water stress, conflict and migration have causal linkages, but the exact nature and direction of these linkages are likely
to be context-dependent and difficult to assess (Institute for
Environmental Security, 2011). Furthermore, it is plausible that
climate change-induced migration causes vicious cycles, whereby
climate change leads to water stress, which leads to conflict, which
leads to more migration, which leads to increasing pressures on

Leon M. Hermans, Faculty of Technology, Policy and Management, Delft University of Technology, P.O. Box 5015, 2600 GA Delft, The Netherlands, e-mail: l.m.hermans@tudelft.nl.

13

water resources , thus increasing water stress and conflict, which
in turn further fuels migration, and so on.
The two aspects of international decision-making and a better
understanding of the associated phenomena, were the subject of
the symposium, ‘Climate change, water stress, conflict and migration’. This paper reviews and discusses some of the main results of
this Symposium. The paper starts with a review of the current
understanding of climate change induced migration, and the role
that water stress and conflict play in this phenomenon. This review
follows the Symposium contributions that addressed three aspects:
(a) the realities on the ground; (b) the international policy
responses; and (c) the current state of understanding. This review
is followed, in the second part of this paper, by an attempt to put
this debate in a more theoretical perspective. Although based on
cues given by Symposium speakers, the second part of the paper
also goes beyond the Symposium contents. Literature on vulnerability is explored and linked to livelihoods frameworks as a promising way to further our understanding of the links between climate change, water stress, conflict and migration. Finally, returning to the Symposium’s presentations and discussions, the implications for policy-making are addressed.

1

Taking stock of realities on the ground, international policy
responses and (limits to) current understanding

Realities on the ground: the case of Bangladesh
A good way to start a review of current knowledge on the links
between climate change, water stress, conflict and migration, is to
look at these four terms and their linkages for specific countries.
To this end, the presentation and discussion of the situation in
Bangladesh is instrumental. Available evidence, facts and trends on
the situation in Bangladesh clearly suggests a degrading cycle
exists between climate change, water stress, conflict and migration
(Muniruzzaman, 2011).
Due to its location, Bangladesh is vulnerable to the impacts of
climate change on Himalayan glacier melting. As the origin of the

14

major rivers that run through the country, glacial melting may
change the future flow regimes in rivers from perennial flows to
seasonal rivers. Also, Bangladesh suffers from the impacts of climate change on sea-level rise, which will affect the safety and salinity in its coastal regions. In addition to these ‘slow but steady’
changes in longer-term patterns, climate change will also lead to an
increased occurrence of extreme weather events, in a society
already plagued by such events under the current conditions.
Added to this mix of ‘soft’ security concerns related to water, food,
and livelihood security, are the ‘hard’ security concerns. These
‘hard’ security concerns are related for instance to risks of radicalization, socio-political unrest and intra- and interstate conflicts. For
instance, there is a conflict between Bangladesh and India over the
construction of dams in some major rivers, at locations upstream
of Bangladesh (Muniruzzaman, 2011).
This makes Bangladesh one of the loci where part of the current
projections used by IPCC, International Office of Migration and
others will materialize: ‘It is estimated that by 2050, 150 million
people could be displaced by climate change related phenomenon
like desertification, increasing water scarcity, floods and storm etc.’
Indeed: ‘Large-scale migration will add extra pressure on the scarce
resources in Bangladesh and thereby heighten competition and
conflict over resources. Intra-regional forced migration, such as
those from Bangladesh to India is subject to stimulate bilateral tensions’ (Muniruzzaman, 2011).

International policy responses
Given these international dimensions, it is clear that climate
migration matters would also need to be addressed between countries at the regional level, and not left solely for national and local
governments to cope with. A first step towards such international
policy responses would be the international recognition of an
increased flow of climate migrants as a real and important consequence of climate change. A review of current international law
and treaties on migration, refugees and displacement, shows that
environmental refugees and climate change-induced migrants are

15

not recognized yet (Flavell, 2011). The existing treaties and conventions provide a basis for certain rights and protection for persons that are displaced due to natural hazards, but environmental
migrants as such can claim little structural protection under international law. Even if migration and mobility may be considered a
human right, the protection of this right is not explicitly arranged
under current laws and treaties. In this regard, the recognition in
the UNFCCC Cancun agreements that climate change may induce
displacement and migration should be considered a helpful starting point and building block: ‘Measures to enhance understanding,
coordination and cooperation with regard to climate change
induced displacement, migration and planned relocation, where
appropriate, at national, regional and international levels.’ (para.
14f, COP 16 Cancun / Mexico, December 2010).

Understanding migration as a multi-faceted phenomenon
The development of such formal policy responses, both internationally and nationally, is complicated by the fact that migration is
a multi-faceted phenomenon. Human migration has multiple
causes, of which environmental factors are just one. Recent
research by the United Nations University and others shows that
various factors play a role in households to migrate including:
• Profession (mainly farmers and cattle herders);
• Attachment (land ownership, family, history);
• Cultural issues (e.g. language);
• Financial means;
• Alternative livelihoods in other villages/regions;
• Pull factors in villages/regions/countries of destination (Afifi,
2011).
This is in line with other reports, such as the assessment report on
environmental migration published by IOM in 2009 (Laczko and
Aghazarm, 2009, p 48):
“It is generally agreed that the key drivers of migration are:

16

a factors related to the region or country of origin, including
political instability and conflict, lack of economic opportunities,
and lack of access to resources (‘push’ factors);
b factors related to the region or country of destination, including
the availability of employment and demand for workers, higher
wages, political stability or access to resources (‘pull’ factors);
c intervening factors that facilitate or restrict migration, including
ease of transportation, family or social networks, government
immigration or emigration policies, economic ties such as trade
and investment linkages, or social and cultural exchanges.
However, what is not so clear is how these different factors interact
with each other to inform migration behaviour or, more importantly, for the purpose of this chapter, the extent and magnitude of
the role that the environment plays in these decisions”.
Thus, the influences of climate change and environmental drivers
are difficult to isolate from other influences on the decision to
migrate. Current knowledge is also not clear on causes and consequences related to intermediate parts in the causal chains that connect climate change and migration, such as water stress and conflict. For instance, an often heard assumption is that water stress
would lead to more conflict. Possibly, the relationship between
water stress and conflict may be another. There is a lot of evidence
that suggests that conflict is less likely in areas under stress, but
instead, conflicts are more likely in areas that have resource to fight
over (Witsenburg, 2011). A special issue of the Journal Peace
Research suggest that there is more violence in time of abundance.
Also a more generic link between climate change and conflict is
difficult to prove, as supported by the data from the database of the
Peace Research Institute in Oslo (Witsenburg, 2011).
Even if we set aside the difficult questions of cause and effect,
the sheer size of the terms in the equation are also insufficiently
known. Few data are available on the size of the current problems
(Truong, 2011). What is the size of environmental migration
flows? Forecasts vary between 25 million to 1 billion climate
migrants by 2050, with the most often cited projections suggesting as much as 200 million climate change-induced migrants by
2050 (Laczko and Aghazarm, 2009). But even if cited by the
IPCC, IOM and the Stern Review (see IOM, 2008, p.11-12), they
17

are forecasts and not established facts. As a recent publication puts
it, citing these projections again and again, does not make them
more (or less) accurate (reference unknown). What is needed is
sound monitoring information on the size of current flows and
their development over time.
The absence of such information regarding international climate
change-induced migration flows points to another way in which
international decision-making is linked to a better understanding
of the underlying phenomena. Not only is a sound understanding
needed for decision-making, there is also some sort of a ‘chickenand-egg’ problem: in the absence of an internationally agreed definition of environmental migrants, measuring quantities becomes
troublesome (Afifi, Douma, Truong, 2011).

Realities on the ground: pastoral livelihoods and access
A better understanding of the links between climate change, water
stress and migration can also be obtained from looking at more
traditional types of migration in response to water stress. Water
stress is expected to increase as a result of climate change, but it is
not a completely new phenomenon. Likewise, migration in
response to water stress is not new. Pastoral livelihoods are a prime
example of a livelihood that uses migration, or mobility, as a key
element in a (rural) livelihood strategy. Although often mistaken
for a primitive transitional livelihood activity, it is actually a ‘skilled
and tailored way to produce food in environments where water is
in deficit’, (Nori, 2011).
If one takes a closer look at pastoral livelihoods and the difficulties encountered by pastoralist groups, it becomes apparent that it
is not the physical phenomenon of water scarcity or variability that
is causing most problems. In fact, (seasonal) mobility has been
developed as a strategy to respond to such variability and local scarcity. It is not resource scarcity, but access that poses problems for
pastoralists; access to water, (range) land, but also access to markets, vaccines and knowledge and information (Nori, Van Mierlo,
2011).

18

Access is difficult. This can be understood by realizing that pastoral activities are often practiced by groups at the margin of
society, in effect marginalized groups. The marginal lands used by
pastoralists are furthest from the capital cities that are typically
located in the ‘green’ areas (Nori, 2011). Furthermore, the causality is not clear: were pastoralist gradually marginalized because of
their distance from the power centres, or were they marginalized
groups who turned to pastoralism as the only remaining option
(Witsenburg, 2011)?
Sometimes access is modified by (new) national laws and regulations. Access to markets may be restricted by national regulations,
such as in Ethiopia, where selling animal proteins to Saudi Arabia
is not allowed, even if it is more lucrative (Nori, 2011). Traditional
grazing grounds may be claimed for other uses, such as national
parks or for the development of large irrigated farms. The state
declares authority and then leases out land to private companies,
either for growing food, bio-fuel crops such as jatropha, or because
valuable minerals or oil resources have been found (Nori, Truong,
2011). Note that such processes do not only affect pastoralists, but
also other groups. For instance, the discovery of oil in the South
China Sea was a cause of conflict and migration, forcing fishermen
out of their traditional fishing grounds (Truong, 2011). In these
cases, physical resource scarcity is not the issue, but rather access
and barriers to access.
Access is not only modified by state institutions and regulations,
but also by traditional culture within the pastoral groups. For
instance, only in recent years a new market in Puntland has developed in camel milk. This was seen as taboo at first, but it is now
becoming a booming activity. Subsequently, the role of Somali
women in society has changed as women have become more
empowered (Nori, 2011). This also points to another aspect:
although sometimes referred to as ‘traditional’, rural livelihoods
such as pastoralism are dynamic and subject to change, also without climate change as a driver (Truong, 2011).
Access can not only be restricted, it can also be enhanced. For
instance, access to knowledge can be addressed by setting up Pastoral Field Schools. Rooted in the belief in indigenous knowledge,

19

Pastoral Field Schools have been established following the example
of the Farmer Field School concept promoted in past years by the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
These field schools are community-based schools located under a
tree, where the local participants lead practical research, tests, and
solve their own problems with minimal guidance from outside
facilitators. Pastoral Field Schools have led, for instance, to the
establishment of participatory early warning systems based on local
knowledge with a little input from satellites. What is missing, however, is a capacity to respond to such early warnings (Van Mierlo,
2011).

Understanding migration in relation to barriers, borders and boundaries
Access and barriers to access provide a critical link, not only for
understanding migration in the context of pastoral livelihood
strategies but also for migration in general. Migration is also linked
to barriers at a fundamental level. Migration was first used in relation to human migration in the 16th century, clearly associated
with the existence of borders (Truong, 2011). Migration is more
than simply moving around; migration is, originally, related to
borders, and borders pose barriers to migrants. These borders, or
barriers, may be national, regional or local, and in existence for a
long time or established recently. Finally, it is important to
remember that it is not only humans that migrate, but also nature
itself, although it does not recognize the boundaries defined by
societies. Wildlife migration and the connection of countries
through river flows are also essential parts of the preservation of
the ecosystems on which much of human livelihoods depend
(Kappelle, 2011).
As a cross-border issue, migration poses challenges to the traditional governance systems, as it needs to be addressed at all levels,
local, national and international.

20

Stock-taking: what we know about climate change, water stress and
migration
When we look at the realities on the ground, the policy responses
and our current knowledge and understanding of climate change,
water stress, conflict and migration, we are clearly dealing with
complex issues.
• Realities on the ground suggest that migration or mobility is an
important and growing phenomenon. It may be induced, forced
or voluntarily. It may be due to climate change, natural hazards
or scarcity of land and water resources, but it may also be caused
by other factors, or, typically, a cluster of different factors.
• Policy responses are needed, but are problematic. There is a clear
need to address the legal rights and responsibilities of environmental migrants in international decision-making. However, the
issue of climate change-induced migration also has to be addressed at other levels. Migration has to do with boundaries and with
crossing boundaries. This makes it impossible to address migration issues at one predefined level of government.
• Understanding the realities is required for sound policy
responses, which is both challenging and currently limited. We
do not know how large the problems are in relation to climate
change-induced migration: the size of environmental migration
is unknown, there are no internationally comparable data available on the subject, and the causal linkages between climate
change and migration are unclear, highly diverse and locationspecific.
In the second part of the paper, we will explore if there are certain
theoretical and analytical perspectives that might act as organizing
frameworks to develop a better understanding of the realities
related to climate change-induced migration and water stress. Following this more theoretical exploration, we will then return to the
policy implications, which should help to cope and respond to the
realities on the ground.

21

2

Exploring a vulnerability lens to organize understanding of climate change, water stress, conflict and migration

Making sense of climate change induced migration: choosing a
perspective for learning
Faced with a complex problem such as climate change-induced
migration in relation to water stress, problem framing becomes a
critical issue (Enserink et al., 2010). How do we look at climate
change-induced migration? Do we frame it as a problem of international migration flows? As a pastoral livelihood issue? As a water
security problem? As a ‘hard’ security issue? A legal issue? A wildlife conservation problem? It will be clear that looking at any one of
these problems can provide useful insights. But it will be difficult,
perhaps sometimes even impossible, to connect and reconcile the
insights that emerge from these very different ways of framing the
problem.
At the Symposium, different contributions were made, illuminating different problems in relation to climate change, water
stress, conflict and migration. If we want to make sense of the relations between these problems and issues, we need to choose a perspective, an angle from which we will connect different problems
at different scales. During the Symposium, a suggestion was done
to further explore these issues by using a ‘disaster’ perspective
(Borel, 2011):
“Processes of disaster can serve as a proxy or model for approaches
that will be needed to anticipate and respond to impacts of climate
change, and its variability and impact on people. Right now disaster provides us with a good model. Some of the common elements
are:
• Need for preventive action – prevention is cheaper than response.
In principle, states have an obligation to cover the whole cycle of
protection, not only the response side. But most governments
emphasize the flashy side of response rather than prevention;
• Need to understand better the whole package of risks that vulnerable people are exposed to. Overcrowding, local violence, domestic violence, policy violence, landlessness, joblessness, political
exclusion, etc. This is the risk in which most of the human
22

population lives today. And it is the reason why the risk of climate change doesn’t appear at the forefront of priorities.
• Challenges to monitor, detect and account for many small
events. Concerning disaster response, large disasters (earthquakes, tsunamis) call for international attention, but many
small events account for the majority of total suffering. It is difficult to account for all these small elements, but they are very
important to understand what’s going on.”

Looking at disasters through a vulnerability lens
Taking ‘disasters’ as a starting point, we can see that the literature
on disaster management, risk management and vulnerability is
diverse. However, there are also some clear overlaps. From a cursory reading of this literature in relation to water stress and climate
change, especially the ongoing discourse on vulnerability, adaptation and resilience is relevant. Vulnerability requires an adaptation
strategy or coping mechanism. Groups that are vulnerable to certain pressures, such as climate change-induced water stress, may
choose to migrate in response. Or, if there are no other options,
they may be forced to (temporarily) migrate as a coping mechanism. Often the most vulnerable groups have no alternative for
dealing with disaster, and if disaster hits them, they are left to the
mercy of nature and society. Therefore, in the following sections of
this article, we will explore the meaning and potential of using a
vulnerability perspective to understand climate change, water
stress, conflict and migration.
Research on vulnerability has evolved from different traditions.
The point that vulnerability does not necessarily have to do with a
physical scarcity of resources, but with access to those resources, is
directly in line with the key notions in one of these traditions: the
entitlement approach (see Adger, 2006). In this tradition, entitlements explain such things as food insecurity and conflict. This
entitlement approach has been put forward by Amartya Sen in the
1980s, whereby entitlements are ‘the set of alternative commodity
bundles that a person can command in a society using the totality
of rights and opportunities that he or she faces’ (Sen, 1984, as
cited in Adger, 2006).
23

Other important traditions, as posited by Neil Adger, are the
approaches rooted in the physical sciences and engineering,
whereby risks of natural hazards are conceived as ‘probability x
impact’. This tradition often interacts with a human/political ecology tradition through, for instance, Pressure-and-Release models
whereby the focus is on why the poor and marginalized groups in a
society are most at risk from natural hazards (Adger, 2006; Turner
II et al., 2003).

Vulnerability of human-environment systems
Rooted in these (and related) traditions, current thinking converges
on notions of vulnerability as a property of a system. Vulnerability
is related to the way in which a coupled human-environment system responds to outside pressures such as perturbations or stressors (Turner et al., 2003). Vulnerability is thought to consist of
three main elements of a coupled human-environment system:
exposure, sensitivity and response (Turner et al., 2003):
• Exposure refers to the components of a system that are exposed
to shocks and stresses. Often such shocks and stresses come
from outside a system, but they may also originate (partly) from
within a certain system. This points to the distinction between
external and internal sides in relation to a system’s vulnerability
(Fussel, 2007). Furthermore, often vulnerability doesn’t result
from a single shock or stressor, but from an interaction among
multiple pressures.
• Sensitivity refers to how sensitive a system is to a certain external pressure. For instance, a pastoral system will be highly sensitive to hazards that affect the availability of land or water resources, as these are critical to the livelihood strategy. Also the sensitivity of a system doesn’t often depend on a single system characteristic, but on a multitude of factors and their interactions.
• Responses refer to the way in which a coupled human-environmental system responds to the pressures and impacts the system. Do pastoralists move to other areas, temporarily or more
permanently? Do they change the size of their herds? Do they

24

diversify into other livelihood strategies to better absorb variability in water availability, or do they migrate?
These three elements of vulnerability are now widely accepted as a
basis for vulnerability analysis, sometimes with minor modifications. For instance, in the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment,
reference is made to Exposure, Sensitivity and Resilience, whereby
immediate and short-term coping mechanisms are considered to
belong under ‘Sensitivity’, while Resilience covers the more fundamental adaptive response strategies (Kasperson, Dow et al.,
2005). Marchand (2009) uses the framework as a basis to model
vulnerability in coastal areas in India and Vietnam. Furthermore,
these three parts are mirrored in disaster management, which
often speaks of a multi-layered approach that should include prevention, event management and post-flood measures (Deltares,
2010).

Understanding vulnerability of systems
Given the above-mentioned conception of vulnerability, it is no
wonder that vulnerability is difficult to measure (Adger, 2006).
One can identify several indicators that may contribute to vulnerability. One could combine these indicators to compose a vulnerability index (e.g. Brooks et al., 2005), but ultimately the role of the
underlying factors in causing vulnerability is highly site and time
specific. The human-environment systems by which the vulnerability is evaluated are dynamic. This means that vulnerability, as a
characteristic of those systems, is also a dynamic phenomenon that
is difficult to capture with static measurements (Adger, 2006).
Furthermore, vulnerability results from an interplay of factors,
whereby the exact nature of the causal relations is difficult to
establish due to delays, threshold effects and feedback mechanisms.
Thus, the initial insights from vulnerability literature confirm
the complexity encountered when looking at climate change, water
stress and migration. There are many factors, many relations, and
it is difficult to single out one specific cause, or to predict one specific outcome resulting from specific pressures. Dealing with vul-

25

nerability requires a systems approach. Vulnerability is a characteristic of a system, not easily pinned down to one specific part of this
system. Systems are generally valued for the outcomes, outputs or
the goods and services they produce. This means that systems perform a function – even if these functions can change over time.
Hence, we can work with the following understanding of vulnerability: ‘Vulnerability refers to the extent to which a system is at
risk of no longer being able to perform its primary functions’.
Thus, understanding vulnerability requires understanding the
‘functioning’ of a certain system.
In elaborating further on this systems approach, it is important
to realize that any system that we choose to focus on will be part of
a nested ‘system-of-systems’. Our system of choice will be one
layer, one aspect. It may have smaller sub-systems within, be part
of a larger system, and have systems that are external to the system
but nevertheless interact with the system. Understanding such systems ultimately requires unpacking the systems until one reaches
the level of the smallest unit. Where systems feature an important
human component, the smallest unit is often that where the individuals and their decisions are perceived (e.g. Ostrom, 2005).
Without resorting to psychological frameworks, the closest we can
get to understanding local systems that inform decisions of migration in underdeveloped areas is a sustainable livelihoods framework, which considers the household as its prime unit of analysis.

Vulnerability in local livelihood systems
A sustainable livelihoods framework can be used to analyse at
household level how people provide for their livelihoods in a given
environment. The dominant framework is explained by Ellis
(2000), and adapted and used for a more specific focus on the link
between water and livelihoods, for instance by Nicol (2000) and
FAO (2005). In a sustainable livelihood framework the purpose of
a local livelihood system is to provide a secure livelihood and
healthy environment. These outcomes are defined in terms of
income level, stability, seasonality and degrees of risk for livelihoods, and to the quality of various characteristics such as land

26

quality, water, biodiversity for the environment (Ellis, 2000). Outcomes are influenced by the decisions that households make
regarding the livelihood strategies. These decisions are based on
the opportunities they have based on their access to assets, in the
context of trends and shocks. This view of livelihoods systems is
illustrated in figure 1.

Livelihood
platform
Natural capital
Physical capital
Human capital
Financial capital
Social capital

Institutions
Institutional
mechanisms that
modify access to
capital

Livelihood
strategies
OUTCOMES

Context
Conditions, trends and shocks

Figure 1: Sustainable livelihoods framework (FAO, 2005, Fig.2, adapted from
Ellis, 2000 and Nicol, 2000).

The sustainable livelihoods framework is not perfect, especially in
its discussion of the role of information, but it helps to recognize
many of the factors mentioned before. It easily translates to the
vulnerability framework and its three elementary concepts. The
livelihood context defines the exposure to (mainly) external stressors and perturbations – but also opportunities. The sensitivity of
the system can be assessed by looking at the way these external
pressures influence access to assets that are critical for obtaining
secure livelihoods and sustainable environments. Responses are
the options that households have to cope with these pressures and
to change their livelihoods. Migration can be part of such a
response strategy (Ellis, 2000).

27

Migration and mobility as strategies to deal with vulnerabilities in a
livelihood system
In relation to vulnerability, the question is: how long can a local
livelihood system function while exposed to stressors and shocks?
When might migration become a serious option to consider in
response to pressures on the livelihood basis? Part of the answer
can be found by looking at this livelihoods basis, which is formed
by a household’s access to assets, to capital. In order to produce
secure livelihoods, a household needs a certain amount of capital to
work with. Typically natural, physical, human, financial and social
capital are distinguished, which is considered to form the livelihood platform. Social capital has close linkages with the institutions that can modify access to the assets.
The assets in a livelihood platform can, to a certain extent, be
substituted and/or converted. Financial capital can be converted
into physical capital when equipment is purchased. In cases of conflict or land-grabbing, access to land may be acquired at the
expense of social capital in the form of trust and good relationships
with other parties in the area. A loss of assets can also be addressed
by changes in livelihood strategies. Loss of access to land or water
resources may be dealt with by moving to other (range)lands, or by
changing livelihood strategies: growing less water-dependent crops
or diversifying livelihood strategies to include other activities. For
the well-educated farmer, human capital in the form of formal
education can help in such a diversification strategy. Loss of any
one particular asset can be disastrous, but that depends on the
extent to which this loss can be addressed by the reliance on other
assets. Hence, there is a sort of ‘networked vulnerability’ as part of
the robustness of a system, to reduce its sensitivity to external
shocks.
In some cases, migration or mobility may be the chosen
response. In terms of migration and mobility, one can then propose a certain distinction between these two terms. Mobility can be
seen as moving around within the existing boundaries of the livelihood system. This would apply to pastoralists moving around in
their traditional territories. They exchange access to one type of
land for access to better lands elsewhere, at the expense of labour

28

and some social capital. Social capital tends to erode when communities maintain less frequent contact.1
Migration can be seen as moving across system boundaries. It is
a much more fundamental change in livelihood strategy. Households, or members of households, move elsewhere. They do not
only move ‘out of’ their prior system, but also ‘into’ another system. In such a way, migrants themselves are a context factor and a
pressure on the systems at their destination. If they stay at those
destination sites they will, eventually, be incorporated in the system, initially as a marginalized group, not well represented in the
institutions that modify access to capital, but later, hopefully, as
more accepted members of the system.

Migration and institutions
As migrants move into other systems, where current institutions
are not equipped to address the claims of these new entrants to
environmental resources such as land and water in those systems,
tensions and conflicts may arise. This is illustrated, for instance, in
cases where pastoralists move into ‘new’ areas that are dominated
by crop-based agriculture. See e.g. FAO (2005) for a case in Tanzania, using the livelihoods framework as basis for vulnerability
analysis.
Thus, understanding some of the responses to migration is
served by understanding the evolution of institutions. Whereas
most of the literature on livelihoods approaches focuses on the use
of capital, other literature focuses on the development of institutions. Here, it is key to realize that trust is a critical term, and that
trust develops over time. New entrants into a system are not yet
part of the trusted clique, and the inclusion of their interests
requires time to develop. Having certain rights asserted through
higher-level institutions is helpful but, in addition, time is needed
for full acceptance at local level. This means that, even with international laws and conventions in place, local institutions also need
1

It may well be that this social capital also means they are underrepresented (marginalized)
in decision-making and governance. In essence, these decision-making arrangements are
social and dynamic constructs. The institutional mechanisms not only modify access to
social capital, they are also the product of the (use) of social capital in the past.

29

to adapt, which takes time and trust-building; essential but difficult
challenges.
Conclusions
The links between climate change, water stress, conflict and migration are uncertain and there is insufficient understanding of those
links to support well-informed policy responses. Yet, the reality on
the ground shows that we cannot put decision-making on hold
until everything is clear. Problems exist, are likely to worsen, and
policy-makers need to act. What could they do? And how does this
review of the Symposium results and further exploration of a vulnerability perspective help to progress towards actionable knowledge?
One consequence of the complexity sketched here, including the
insights from vulnerability literature that various interactions and
combination of factors produce certain outcomes, is that, at the
level of the system, probabilities are unknown. It is not meaningful
to predict certain consequences tied to individual factors in the
context or within a system, not even within margins of error or
with probability distributions. There are too many unknown variables and too many possible combinations with different effects,
including delays and threshold effects. This makes ‘classic’ risk
assessments of the type ‘risk = probability x impact’ problematic.
Rather, we need to move towards a more adaptive policy-making
approach (Walker et al., 2001). We do not know the exact relations
in our systems, but we do know some of the factors that play a role
and some of the relations at work. And for some of these factors
and relations, we can assess probabilities, or predict future developments, even if we cannot do this for the system as a whole. Based
on our current knowledge and ‘best guesstimates’, we can formulate policies and decisions, and we can anticipate certain future
risks and uncertainties. We can think, in advance, of mitigating
measures or hedging actions, to make our policies more robust, for
instance, by ensuring that environmental migrants and climate
change-induced migration gain international recognition and
rights, through inputs in the text discussed at UNFCCC forums.

30

Given the fundamental nature of the systemic uncertainties,
such ‘robust’ policy decisions will need to be accompanied by continuous learning efforts. For such learning, it is useful to signal the
assumptions we have made in coming to decisions (Walker et al.,
2001). Can we monitor certain indicators to obtain feedback on
the accuracy of these assumptions, while implementing our policies? Thus, making assumptions explicit, as was done at the Symposium, becomes a hallmark of future learning. This seems one of
the most promising ways to make progress towards sensible and
fair decisions, at all the relevant levels, on the way to address the
multi-faceted and multi-level linkages between climate change,
water stress, conflict and migration.

References
Adger, W.N. (2006) Vulnerability; in: Global Environmental
Change, vol 16, pp 268–281.
Afifi, T. (2011) Environment, Climate Change and Human Displacement: From empirical evidence to action. Keynote speech
and Closing Remarks. Symposium on Climate Change, Water
Stress, Conflict and Migration. UPEACE/IES/ISS/UNESCO, 21
September 2011, The Hague.
Borel, R. (2011) Introduction to the Symposium and Closing
Remarks. Keynote speech. Symposium on Climate Change,
Water
Stress,
Conflict
and
Migration.
UPEACE/IES/ISS/UNESCO, 21 September 2011, The Hague.
Deltares (2010) Flood Risk Management; Deltares, Delft.
Douma, W. (2011) Introduction of first draft Symposium Recommendations. Symposium on Climate Change, Water Stress,
Conflict and Migration. UPEACE/IES/ISS/UNESCO, 21 September 2011, The Hague.
Ellis, F. (2000) Rural Livelihoods and Diversity in Developing
Countries. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Enserink, B., L. Hermans, J. Kwakkel, W. Thissen, J. Koppenjan
and P. Bots (2010) Policy Analysis of Multi-Actor Systems;
Boom/Lemma Publishers, The Hague.

31

FAO (2005) Water productivity and vulnerable groups in the
Mkoji sub-catchment. Final Project Report. SWMRG Sokoine
University of Agriculture and Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN, Rome.
Flavell, A. (2011) Climate Change, Migration, Security. Policy
Implications. Introductory Presentation. Symposium on Climate
Change,
Water
Stress,
Conflict
and
Migration.
UPEACE/IES/ISS/UNESCO, 21 September 2011, The Hague.
IOM (2008) Migration and Climate Change. IOM Migration
Research Series 31. Prepared by Oli Brown; International Organization for Migration, Geneva.
Institute for Environmental Security (2011) Background Paper.
Symposium on Climate Change, Water Stress, Conflict and Migration. UPEACE/IES/ISS/UNESCO, 21 September 2011, The
Hague.
Kappelle, M. (2011) Panel: Perspectives on Climate Change, Water
Stress, Conflict and Migration. Symposium on Climate Change,
Water
Stress,
Conflict
and
Migration.
UPEACE/IES/ISS/UNESCO, 21 September 2011, The Hague.
Kasperson, R.E., K. Dow, with E.R.M. Archer, D. Ca´ceres, T.E.
Downing, T. Elmqvist, S. Eriksen, C. Folke, G. Han, K. Iyengar,
C. Vogel, K.A. Wilson, G. Ziervogel (2005) Vulnerable Peoples
and Places. Chapter 6 in the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment
Report, Part 1: Current State and Trends Assessment.
Laczko, F. and C. Aghazarm (eds) (2009) Migration, Environment
and Climate Change: Assessing the Evidence; International
Organization for Migration, Geneva.
Maniruzzaman, A.N.M. (2011) Security Implications of Climate
Change. Water Stress, Conflict and Migration in Bangladesh.
Keynote speech. Symposium on Climate Change, Water Stress,
Conflict and Migration. UPEACE/IES/ISS/UNESCO, 21 September 2011, The Hague.
Marchand, M. (2009) Modelling Coastal Vulnerability. Design and
evaluation of a vulnerability model for tropical storms and
floods; IOS Press, Amsterdam.
Mierlo, J. van (2011) Panel: Perspectives on Climate Change,
Water Stress, Conflict and Migration. Symposium on Climate

32

Change,
Water
Stress,
Conflict
and
Migration.
UPEACE/IES/ISS/UNESCO, 21 September 2011, The Hague.
Nicol, A. (2000) Adopting a sustainable livelihoods approach to
water projects: Implications for policy and practice. Working
Paper 133, Overseas Development Institute, London.
Nori, M. (2011) Panel: Perspectives on Climate Change, Water
Stress, Conflict and Migration. Symposium on Climate Change,
Water
Stress,
Conflict
and
Migration.
UPEACE/IES/ISS/UNESCO, 21 September 2011, The Hague.
Turner, B.L. II, R.E. Kasperson, P.A. Matsone, J. J. McCarthy, R.W.
Corellg, L. Christensene, N. Eckleyg, J. X. Kasperson, A. Luerse,
M. L. Martello, C. Polsky, A. Pulsipher, and A. Schiller (2003) A
framework for vulnerability analysis in sustainability science; in:
PNAS, vol 100 (14), pp 8074–8079.
Truong, T.-D. (2011) Panel: Perspectives on Climate Change,
Water Stress, Conflict and Migration. Symposium on Climate
Change,
Water
Stress,
Conflict
and
Migration.
UPEACE/IES/ISS/UNESCO, 21 September 2011, The Hague.
Walker, W. E., S.A. Rahman and J. Cave (2001) Adaptive policies,
policy analysis, and policymaking; in: European Journal of
Operational Research, vol 128(2), pp 282–289.
Witsenburg, K. (2011) Panel: Perspectives on Climate Change,
Water Stress, Conflict and Migration. Symposium on Climate
Change,
Water
Stress,
Conflict
and
Migration.
UPEACE/IES/ISS/UNESCO, 21 September 2011, The Hague.

33

34

Climate change, water stress, conflict
and migration
Background paper

Climate change, water stress and other environmental problems
are increasingly recognized as major issues threatening human
security. Their impacts on human life affect many aspects of international politics. Migration and conflict are two of the possible
effects.
Climate change is likely to dramatically increase the frequency and
intensity of hydro-meteorological hazards, such as tropical storms,
floods and landslides. All of these phenomena may severely restrict
livelihood options for large populations in hotspots. The new challenges that climate change pose on the world's population have
already been discussed by high-level international institutions. The
General Assembly of the United Nations has addressed this issue
and has included climate change in the concept of human security
during the human security debate that took place on 20 to 21 of
May 2010. Furthermore, after having discussed the impact of climate change for the first time in 2007 without reaching clear
results, the topic of climate change as a human security issue has
been recently discussed by the UN Security Council. The meeting
which took place on 20 July 2011 aimed at considering whether to
expand the Security Council's mission to keep the peace that could
potentially be threatened by climate change, including the creation
of a new environmental peacekeeping force – green helmets –
which could intervene in conflicts caused by shrinking resources.
Even though the council settled for a watered-down statement of
the ‘possible security implications of climate change’, there is
increasing attention paid to this subject in the international arena
(Security Council, 2011).

35

But besides the political turmoil, climate change is a hard reality
for many around the world. For instance, Bangladesh is one of the
most vulnerable countries to sea level rise due to its high population density and low-lying land. Based on these factors, the UNDP
predicts that 21 per cent of the country could go under salt water
due to a sea-level rise of approximately 1 metre (Rahman et al.,
2007). Migration seems to be the only chance of survival for this
population (Hoque Patwari 2009). Governments and regional
institutions are raising awareness of this issue. According to the
Asian Development Bank (ADB), governments in the Asia-Pacific
region face the risk of unprecedented numbers of people displaced,
within and between nations, by storms, floods and other impacts of
climate change (Forest for Climate, 2011).
The impacts on climate change may also involve violent conflict.
Disasters and environmental degradation are likely to undermine
livelihoods by threatening the access to clean water and undermining food security (Reuveny, 2007). Conflicts may arise when there
is a competition over limited resources, such as land and water.
In accordance with Kolmannskog (2008), such conflicts may relate
to climate change-induced migration in two scenarios with the
potential of a vicious cycle: forced migration can be triggered by –
and itself also trigger – environmental conflicts. If these relationships were put in a simple diagram they would look like the following:
Case 1: Climate change impacts conflict migration
Case 2: Climate change impacts migration conflict
In addition, we cannot exclude:
Case 3: Migration environmental degradation conflict
In the first case, there is a direct link between climate change
impacts on the environment and migration. Thus initially the
climate change impacts may cause violent conflict, and in a second
phase those affected by the conflict are forced to flee due to violence. In addition, any type of conflict can further deteriorate or

36

accelerate environmental degradation, which in turn may lead to
migration.
Drought is expected to be one of the climate change impacts that
could trigger conflict as per the first case. According to Kolmannskog, water scarcity may contribute to distributional conflict,
although as also other researchers have found, interaction with certain socio-economic and political factors must be present for (violent) conflict to erupt (Suliman 2005). Hence, there is potential for
conflict when a population experiences social discrimination in
terms of access to the safe and clean water. Schellnhuber et al.
(2007) argue that the impacts of water scarcity and soil degradation on food security have led to migration rather than violent conflict.
Regarding the second case of links between climate change and
conflict, some experts consider migration as one of the most alarming possible effects of climate change (Campbell et al., 2007).
Research suggests that migration – along with the politicization of
ethnicity, the financial effects of a diaspora, and export of existing
conflicts – could exacerbate existing conflicts (Kolmannskog
2008).
And in the third case, a massive influx of migration can put excessive pressure on the environment where migrants relocate. This is
mainly due to a sudden increase of demand on resources like
water, fuel wood and food. If ethnic groups have to compete for the
limited resources, the likelihood that this competition turns into
conflict may increase if there is a history of tension between the
ethnic groups due to existing social or cultural differences.
Additionally, other factors such as governance, political stability,
economic strength and the history of violence in the places of transit or destiny of the migration will be potential conflict variables.
A contemporary case of a country being heavily affected by the
impacts of climate change, and which illustrates the migration and
security dimensions of the problem, is Bangladesh. With a geo-

37

graphic area slightly larger than that of England, but with almost
three times England's population, Bangladesh faces severe human
and food security challenges. On the one hand, the geographical
composition of the country, situated on a delta and criss-crossed by
54 rivers, makes it highly susceptible to nearly every worst-case
climate change scenario (Carney et al., 2011). A one-metre sealevel rise would leave almost 20 per cent of the country under
water. Current sea-level rise is turning much of the country's fertile
land into a saline desert, threatening the population's access to
locally-produced food and the national agricultural economy.
It is not surprising therefore that many Bangladeshis see migration
as the best option for survival. Its (historically friendly) neighbour,
India, feels, however, that it cannot accommodate large influxes of
migrants and has started to build a guarded fence around Bangladesh. Smuggling of migrants and casualties amongst those trying
to cross are heightening tensions between the two countries and
are compounding the already difficult stability situation in the
wider region.
The melting of the glaciers on the Tibetan Plateau and in the
Himalayas, the water tower of South and South-East Asia will
become a major geo-political factor for the region including China,
and thus for the world as a whole.
***
On the global level, it is hard to predict the number of people in
need of moving out of their countries due to environmental factors.
But experience from previous years has drawn some estimates of
displacements induced by natural disasters. According to the
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), at least 36 million people were displaced by sudden-onset disasters in 2008. Of those, more than 20 million were
displaced by sudden-onset climate-related disasters (OCHA and
IDMC, 2008). Moreover, there is evidence that about 4.6 million
people were newly internally displaced by conflict in 2008, in con-

38

trast to the mentioned 36 million of environmentally displaced
persons (IOM, 2009).
Besides the threats of sudden-onset disasters, slow-onset events
such as drought and erosion will have major impacts on freshwater
and food production (Kolmannskog, 2008). Such impacts are
already affecting hundreds of millions of people around the world,
while demand for safe drinking water continues to increase due to
growing population. According to an IPCC report, it is predicted
that rain will decrease in the already semi-arid to arid sub-tropics,
increasing evaporation, rising sea levels, and resulting in the
salinization of coastal groundwater (Parry et al., 2007). Threats to
food security are also expected to increase with the temperature
rise. The IPCC reported that water problems will affect 74 to 250
million people in Africa by 2020, and more than a billion people
in Asia by 2050 (Parry et al., 2007).
Predicting the precise number of people that will need to leave
their countries because of the impacts of climate change in the
forthcoming years is not possible. Also it has to be realized that
migration in the sense of moving away from one’s existing location
simply may not be an option due to the lack of even the most basic
resources to do so. However, it is a fact that there is significant
potential for migration and displacement. The impacts of climate
change and other forms of environmental degradation (pollution,
damming and drainage of water courses and wetlands) are a real
phenomenon already affecting large populations around the world,
and they will increasingly continue to do so. In turn, the consequent migration due to these climate changes has effects on the
global economy, international development, peaceful societies, and
national budgets, all of which could have serious implications on
human security and wellbeing. As UNEP’s Executive Director
Achim Steiner expressed it, ‘the world does not have perfect
knowledge on current or future climate changes’, but ‘…human
beings have never planned strategies or responses based on hundred percent certainty [...]. Rather we make decisions based on risk
assessments…’ (UNEP, 2011). Report results by several institu-

39

tions, including those by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC), aren’t favourable and the clock keeps on ticking.

1

Definition of environmental migrants

Currently, there is no legal definition of environmental migrants to
which a framework of protection can be attributed. In 1985, a
researcher of the United Nations Environmental Programme
(UNEP), Essam El-Hinnawi, used the term ‘environmental refugees’ to define those people who involuntarily leave their traditional habitat because of a marked environmental disruption. This
was the first attempt at providing a definition, and pointed out the
need for a protocol for humanitarian assistance and protection
(Oliver-Smith and Shen, 2009).
However, the term ‘environmental refugee’ raises controversy
because environmental migrants do not qualify as refugees under
the 1951 Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees as
amended by the 1967 Protocol. Critiques say that referring to
them as refugees is misleading due to the lack of a legal basis in
international law, and potentially undermining the legal regime
protecting refugees (Westra, 2009). For these reasons, the term of
environmental refugee has been strongly rejected by the IOM and
United Nations – even though the UN Secretary-General Ban KiMoon made use of that term to express the severity that climate
change impacts pose on human life at the meeting about climate
change as a human security issue on 20 July 2011 at the Security
Council (Security Council, 2011).
Further attempts of defining this issue have been made and, as the
number of communities affected by climate change is on the rise,
there is increasing literature on the topic. The current debate presents positions ranging from those advocating for the expansion of
the definition of a refugee in the 1951 Refugee Convention, those
calling for the adoption of new instruments, and to those claiming
that the need of providing environmental migrants with a refugeelike protection is exaggerated and dangerous.

40

Moreover, another point of discussion is whether the model of protection should cover displacement across borders due to climate
change impacts only, or if should include a broader range of environmental factors. Hence there is a need for establishing concrete
criteria that determine the access conditions and scope of the
model of protection.

2

The current debate on climate change and human rights

Scholars have identified that the inexistence of environmental
rights and the absence of accepting environmental refugees under
international humanitarian law are among the difficulties of adapting the existing international legal frameworks to protect environmental migrants. In this sense, one of the main problems is the
inexistent legal recognition of the gravity of environmental destruction and its impact on humans (Westra, 2009). Existing refugee
norms consider environmental protection only in the context of
warfare. Thus, there is a need for establishing criteria that determine whether an environmental harm constitutes a human rights
violation.
In the literature on human rights and environmental law, three
strategies for constructing a human rights-based approach to climate change can be found: (1) the application of procedural rights
found in international law to climate change litigation; (2) a reinterpretation of existing human rights in the environmental context; and (3) the recognition of a distinct right to environmental
well-being in the framework of human rights (Aminzadeh, 2007).
The first strategy is criticized for not addressing the substance of
the issue, and for not creating a coherent legal framework that
harmonizes international environmental law and human rights
law. But the most heated debate lies between, and within, those
advocating for re-interpretation of existing rights and norms, and
those in favor of creating new rights and protocols.

41

Some of those advocating re-interpretation suggest extending the
legal definition of refugee of the 1951 Refugee Convention and
1967 Protocol to include those people displaced due to impacts of
climate change, or broader environmental factors. Others look at
the ‘fear of persecution' requirement of the Convention and
interpret environmental harm, the intention of harming a specific
population group in the context of man-made disasters, or the
intentional omission of assistance and protection of a population
group after an environmental disturbance as forms of persecution
(Lopez, 2007, 378-379). ‘Environmental discrimination’, as it is
sometimes referred to, (Westra, 2009), also means that it is
possible to encounter ‘governments that are intentionally
destroying a people's environment, are discriminating against
them in the provision of assistance, or are using the consequences
of a disaster’ (Stavropoulou, 2008) in ways that could qualify as
persecution for one or more of the reasons of the 1951 Refugee
Convention. Indigenous groups may be the most vulnerable to this
kind of discrimination and special protection might be required
(Westra, 2009). This position, however, has been put forward by
many scholars who claim that such re- interpretation could include
an incredibly large amount of people, and it is suggested to limit
the definition with specific requirements. Another difficulty arising
is that the ‘persecution’ in the form of the environmental harm is
not caused, at least not caused solely, by the country from which
persons are fleeing, but rather by other countries.
On the other hand, those proposing the creation of new legal
frameworks justify their position by stressing that the spectrum of
solutions may range from mitigation resources to relocation. Thus,
the term refugee of the 1951 Refugee Convention and 1967 Protocol should not be expanded according to them (Bronen, 2009).
Furthermore, others call for the need to recognize the plight of
environmental migrants as superior to that of regular convention
refugees ‘in the sense that the jus cogens norms that are not
observed from the beginning of the actions or omissions that cause
the condition (in turn causing their flight) are non-derogable,
whether or not the states involved have signed a convention dealing
with their problem’ (Westra, 2009). Finally, one more argument in

42

favour of creating a new legal framework of protection of environmental migrants under the human rights regime is the universal
jurisdiction of this regime. In contrast to international environmental law, the human rights regime allows greater intrusion upon
states’ internal affairs and thus reaches situations that international
environmental law cannot. Thus, human rights enjoy universal
jurisdiction based on the theory that ‘some behaviors are so unacceptable that they are every nation’s concern regardless of where
they occur or whom they involve’ (Osofsky, 2005).

3

Universal protection or ad hoc basis action?

Having no consensus on the definition and rights of environmentally displaced people is confusing and unhelpful, yet nonetheless
expected. The problem lies on two main issues: (1) the difficulty of
isolating environmental factors from other drivers of migration,
thus establishing the conditions under which environmentally-displaced people can be granted protection; and (2) the lack of environmental rights and effective mechanisms for their protection.

3.1 Conditions under which environmental migrants should be
granted international protection
Scholars and experts have provided classifications of migrants or
refugees based on various elements. Some of these elements are
the subject of debate concerning the establishment of criteria for
the conditions under which protection can be granted.
i Degree of compulsion involved in the displacement. Voluntary
migrants choose to relocate for a variety of reasons, most commonly related to economic improvement. Other migrants are
forced to relocate by external forces, such as contemplated in the
1951 Convention on refugees. Thus, one may say that migrants
not meeting the criteria of the mentioned Convention can be
considered voluntary migrants. However, between these clearly
defined categories lies a grey area with those people mobilizing

43

due to deficiencies in the local social, economic or environmental context. Many migrants cannot demonstrate direct or
social compulsion to relocate. Thus, compulsion can be intense,
like in the case of an acute natural disaster, or moderate, like in
the case of gradual environmental degradation (Westing, 1992).
A successful framework for environmentally- displaced people
should contemplate measures in cases like displacement as an
anticipatory move, a way of coping with an emergency condition, or a last measure of survival and last resort.
ii Duration of displacement. Depending on the resulting
(in)hospitability of the place of environmental disruption, the
displacement can be temporary or permanent (Stal and Warner
2009, 8). Slow-onset events leading ultimately to the devastation of ecosystems are the more likely events to generate seasonal and long-term migration. This is particularly the case for
people whose livelihoods directly depend on the surrounding
ecological conditions. The duration of displacement caused by
rapid-onset events will depend on the level of devastation caused
and the possibilities of reconstruction.
iii Boundaries of the displacement. This element refers to whether
the displacement is within or outside national boundaries. The
scenarios studied in the symposium will focus on international
displacement, while acknowledging that up until now, most
environmental migrants stayed in their own country. Research
on migration patterns has found that people are more likely to
migrate when they have a social network abroad. Thus, migrants
are expected to choose the destination where they already know
people who live there (McLeman, 2006).
For the purposes of the Symposium, we suggest the study of a
couple of scenarios in order to define the appropriate legal protection. Since some of the main recommendations from the Symposium should aim at drafting a new international legal institution of
protection, scenarios that pose plausible forced and international
migration due to climate change impacts should be considered.
However, these scenarios are not definitive and experts at the

44

Symposium will have the opportunity of narrowing down or elaborating the cases in which protection could be applied.
1 Cases of sudden extreme environmental events that may cause
large-scale human displacement in the wake of natural disasters.
The drivers of this type of migration are tsunamis, flash floods,
and severe storms (cyclones or hurricanes).
2 Cases of advanced stages of gradual environmental change causing endangered habitats and livelihoods, which will promote
large-scale permanent migration. Drivers of this type of migration are advanced ecosystem degradation such as sea-level rise,
water scarcity and desertification.
It is important to study possible scenarios and to consider these
elements of environmental migration when establishing under
which conditions and to what extent protection will be granted.
Particularly in the case of gradual environmental degradation, the
difficulty lies in determining the threshold levels of environmental
destruction where protection is needed. Also, the prerequisites of
accessing protection by international law may vary depending on
the vulnerability of the affected communities. Governments and
communities have different capacities of coping with environmental and climate change impacts. Such coping capacities or
resilience depends on various social, economic and environmental
parameters that should be considered when granting international
protection to those being environmentally displaced (Renaud et al.,
2007).

3.2 Environmental rights and mechanisms for their protection. A brief
overview on existing international and regional legal instruments
related to environmental migrants
The issues of climate change impacts, human security and migration have already generated a response from the international
community. However, they are still recent topics on the international agenda, e.g. the main international instrument dealing with
the issue of climate change, the United Nations Framework Con-

45

vention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) included the problematique of human mobility for the first time in Draft Decision /CP.16 of December 2010 (UNFCCC, 2010). This recommended
establishing the Cancun Adaptation Framework as part of addressing the loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change in relation to both extreme weather events and slow
onset events. These recommendations are to be considered by the
18th Conference of the Parties of the UNFCCC at the end of
2012.
Currently the outlook for substantial and binding mitigation
agreements is not very positive, as attention to the challenges for
adaptation, including improved insights in the migration and relocation aspects, becomes more salient.
On the regional level, the Council of Europe (CoE) has acknowledged the relevance of these issues for Europe and has called for
the elaboration of a CoE ‘Framework Convention for the Recognition of Status and rights of Environmental Migrants’ (Parliamentary Assembly, 2008). Within the European Union, the European
Commission has stressed the need for a policy response to the
impacts of climate change on migration (European Commission,
2008). Other relevant initiatives of the European Union are the
research project on environmental change and forced migration
scenarios (EACH-FOR), and the research project by the European
Refugee Fund on environmental degradation as possible factor of
forced migration to EU Member States.
Nevertheless, despite these international and regional initiatives
the repercussions of climate change impacts on the individual person have often been neglected in international instruments. The
question of how to deal with those being displaced due to environmental and climate factors, particularly in terms of their legal
status, has hardly been touched upon in the international political
agenda. However, there is ongoing debate among scholars of
public international law on the validity or the potential use of
existing international and regional legal instruments in the clarifi-

46

cation of the environmental refugees' legal status and international
protection.
a Refugee law. As previously mentioned, there is a heated discussion about the applicability of refugee law in the case of environmental migration. The arguments revolve around whether or
not climate-induced displacements fulfill the 'refugee' core elements of the definition in the Geneva Refugee Convention
(GRC): (i) well-founded fear of persecution, and (ii) a nexus of
the well-founded fear of persecution with one of the enumerated
reasons (race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular
social group, or political opinion) (OHCHR, 1951).
Those advocating the implementation of refugee law in the
case of environmental migrants argue that they can fulfil the
element of fear of persecution. While there is no defined concept
of persecution, it is recognized that it consists of severe harm or
violation of human rights, and also of a lack of state protection
(Ammer, 2009). It is argued that in some instances those elements of persecution are present in environmental disasters or
degradation. A commonly-used example is that of the drainage
of marshes in southern Iraq. In this region the tribes of the socalled (Shi'a)'Marsh Arabs have established their livelihoods
based on marshes through fishing, buffalo breeding and agriculture. Considered rebellious by the Saddam Hussein regime, the
government started and executed major drainage works of the
marshes with the intent to destroy this ethnic group. This led to
dramatic loss of livelihoods and deportation, as a result of which
thousands of Marsh Arabs died (Lopez, 2007).
b African Union Convention of the Organization for African Unity
(OAU) governing the specific aspects of refugee problems in Africa.
This regional convention recognizes an expanded definition of
refugees as persons who were forced to leave their home country
‘because their lives, safety or freedom have been threatened by
[...] circumstances which have seriously disturbed public order’
(OAU, 1969).
There is no consensus among international law scholars on
whether the protection of environmentally displaced persons can

47

be regarded as obligation under the OAU Convention. On the
one hand it is argued that the reason behind the broad refugee
definition is found in the support of the flight of displaced people in the wars of independence in the continent (Ammer,
2009). On the other hand, it is contended that the OAU Convention unequivocally includes victims of environmental crises
since such events seriously disturb the public order (Lopez,
2007).
Some scholars point out that even though environmental
migrants could qualify for protection by these instruments, the
OAU Convention provides only a short-term solution for people
who return to their countries after the crisis is over. Those
affected by durable environmental degradation and with no place
to go need a different kind of protection.
c Cartagena Declaration. The Cartagena Declaration on Refugees
also contemplates a broad definition of refugee, which like the
OAU Convention sets ‘circumstances which have seriously disturbed public order’ as an element to qualify for refugee status
(OAS, 1984). However, the International Conference on Central
American Refugees (CIREFCA) has clarified the scope of the
definition and announced that ‘circumstances seriously disturbing public order must result from human acts and not from
natural disasters’ (CIREFCA, 1989).

3.2.1 Submerging territories
In addition to these legal instruments, there is the extremely
urgent case of submerging island states. The disappearance of
small island states is a consequence of sea-level rise, and the
UNHCR has acknowledged its relevance as a particular challenge
(UNHCR, 2008). The most affected island states are Tuvalu,
Nauru, Kiribati, Vanuatu, Maldives and the Bahamas. Countries
with low-lying coastal zones like Bangladesh and Vietnam will not
entirely submerge, but are expected to lose a significant part of
their surface.

48

The status of a population whose territory has been submerged
is not clear from a public international law perspective. Scholars
point out two alternatives. The first one is that the country of origin
and citizenship continue to exist. This is possible if the government has the right to exercise some forms of sovereignty in parallel
to the territory of a third state, if the country of origin was ceded
territory from a third state, or if new land could be 'created' (land
reclamation). Tuvalu, for example, is considering buying land from
a third state such as New Zealand (Ammer, 2009)
The second option submerging states have is that the country of
origin and citizenship ceases to exist. Scholars suggest that an
international body would need to be made responsible for determining when the state ceases to exist, and regulate the conditions
under which such determination can be made (Ammer, 2009).
Regarding the citizenship status of the population, it is not clear
whether the stateless-ness regime or international protection obligations are applicable (Ammer, 2009). The Convention relating to
the status of Stateless Persons bases its definition of stateless-ness on
the denial of nationality under the 'operation of law' – that is, no
state recognizes a person as a national (OHCHR, 1954). This
means that the convention does not contemplate situations of de
facto stateless-ness, such as would be the case of a person in possession of a citizenship, which in practice is not effective (Ammer,
2009). Hence, the population of submerging island states would
not qualify for protection under this Convention.
In conclusion, there is a need for international involvement with
respect to forced migration. The pressing situation of those being
displaced calls for the creation of new international legal instruments that provide them with rights and access to international
protection. This challenge, however, should only be part of a larger
legal framework for environmental justice aiming at the adoption
of sustainable ways of living and defining the responsibility of
states.

49

4

Looking for solutions

In this section we present a series of arguments and current
debates that aim at concluding policy recommendations. The basis
of such debates and policy recommendations fall within four categories: (1) the legal aspects of environmental migration and the
search for a legal definition of environmental migrants; (2) measures of prevention and adaptation to climate change; (3) best practices; and (4) capacity-building.

4.1 Prevention and adaptation to climate change
As previously mentioned, the UNFCCC is the main international
legal instrument to deal with mitigation of and adaptation to climate change and its impacts. The traditional industrialized countries, with the exception of the United States, have ratified the
Kyoto Protocol with binding commitments to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions by 2012 by an average of 5% against 1990
levels. The other Parties, formally still ‘developing countries’ are of
course also committed to reducing their emissions on the basis of
the principle of ‘common but differentiated responsibilities’, but
do not have obligatory emission reduction targets, and are entitled
to financial and technological support from the developed ‘Kyoto’
countries in meeting their mitigation and adaptation objectives.
It has been recognized now that former developing countries like
Brazil, India, China and South Africa with rapid economic growth
and rapidly-expanding industrial sectors and thus large greenhouse
gas emissions cannot remain outside a regime with strict emission
limits. For example, China overtook the United States in 2007 as
the leading emitter of these gases in the world. Whether this shift
will result in the development of a global ‘Kyoto Protocol’ after
2012 will depend on the very difficult negotiations of the 17th
Conference of the Parties of the UNFCCC, 28 November - 10
December 2011, in Durban, South Africa. While all efforts are
needed to come to a drastic and effective international agreement
to reduce emissions, the composition of the global atmosphere is

50

already such that the impacts of climate change will manifest
themselves for decades in all parts of the world, requiring massive
investments in adaptation. This again makes the Cancun
Adaptation Framework of December 2010 such a vital instrument.
An excellent first programme to implement the Framework is suggested in the submission by the Institute for Environment and
Human Security of the United Nations University in Bonn to the
UNFCCC on 15 August 2011. The submission identifies,
amongst others, knowledge gaps in the role of the environment as
a push factor for migration, the need for climate risk management
strategy and conflict mediation and the need for new thinking in
relation to the possibility that these measures may not be able to
keep apace with ‘the rising and potentially permanent changes
associated with desertification, sea level rise, ocean acidification,
loss of geologic and other freshwater sources, etc., which can add
pressure to human mobility’(UNU-EHS, 2011).
While the UNFCCC is the multilateral environmental convention
(MEA) with the most political weight (it deals with energy, one of
the most if not the most important economic and geopolitical
commodity) other MEAs are also apt to carry out the Cancun
Adaptation agenda. MEAs like the Convention on Biological
Diversity and the Ramsar Convention (The Convention on
Wetlands of International Importance, especially as Waterfowl
Habitat) are of great value to protect the natural defenses of
communities against the impacts of climate change, e.g. intact
coral reefs and mangroves form first lines of protection of coastal
zones against sea-level rise.
Also, there is a lot of room for the inclusion and participation of
existing channels of multilateral and bilateral assistance and
national governments in the climate change adaptation agenda.

51

a

Prioritizing prevention and risk reduction in the disaster management agenda

Perhaps one of the most important challenges is prioritizing, at
international and national levels, the more structural and preventative risk reduction in the disaster management agenda. Some
observe that there appears to be more attention paid to humanitarian and direct development action than to disaster risk reduction.
This may be a consequence of lack of understanding and a cultural
divide between development and disaster specialists, and of the
perception that risk reduction competes with other development
agendas (Schipper and Pelling 2006). Furthermore, risk reduction
policies generally work on long-term objectives that do not give
prompt, visible effects, as emergency relief does. Thus, there is a
need for integrating disaster risk reduction, humanitarian relief
and development into one agenda that allows for collaboration
from all these fields. Even though this may require some rethinking in development practices, a few administrative changes could
make a difference. For example, some experts have proposed to
integrate adaptation into development decision-making by applying
risk assessments to development assistance projects (Burton et al.,
2006). This concept has been borrowed from the World Bank's
due-diligence policy and the ‘screening tool’ which provides information on climate trends, scenarios and projections, local resilience to climate shocks and adaptive capacity of the environment
where a project will be implemented (World Bank, 2006).
The benefits of introducing mandatory climate risk assessments on
development projects financed by multinational lenders and donor
countries providing bilateral assistance are many. Developers can
better understand and integrate climate change factors into project
planning, help decision- makers develop the policies or measures
needed to tackle climate change impacts, and overall contribute to
climate change adaptation and risk reduction. But in order for this
to happen, the information retrieved by the risk assessments must
be formally considered in the project design, review and approval.
If a project proposal does not seem to perform satisfactorily on the

52

assessment it should not be approved until it has been modified to
reduce the risks to acceptable levels (Burton et al., 2006).
As an initiative like this could mean higher up-front costs for
donors and recipient countries, incentives have to be built into
such integrated projects.
National and international NGOs which the have a longer term
‘tenure’ than governments should be involved in project design,
and especially in project implementation monitoring.

b

Implementing Early Warning Systems at national and local levels

A vital role should be played by early warning system tools that aim
at generating, disseminating and using information ‘about potential risks, hazards, and vulnerabilities to empower individuals and
communities under threat from natural (e.g. droughts, floods, heat
waves, tornadoes and other hazards (famine, violent conflict) to
take effective and timely decision-making to protect lives, property
and the environment from the effects of disasters’ (Vordzorgbe,
2007).
Overall they contain three basic elements: monitoring and early
warning, risk assessment, and mitigation and response plans,
which are up-to-date and, if possible, tested.
The first stage of monitoring and risk assessment requires vast
human and technological resources and collaboration with international or regional programmes such as the Famine Early Warning
Systems Network (FEWS NET), funded by USAID, and the Global
Monitoring for Food Security (GMFS) started jointly by the
European Space Agency (ESA) and the European Commission
Global Monitoring for Environmental and Security (GMES)
Initiative. Both initiatives monitor, analyse and identify threats to
food security issues (e.g. through vegetation monitoring). FEWS
NET operates in Africa, Central America, Haiti, Afghanistan and
the United States, and GMFS concentrates on Sub-Saharan Africa.
Mitigation and response stages require good local organization
and broad-reaching communication with the population at risk.
These tasks should be fulfilled by the national and local governments, as well as with NGOs. Communicating an approaching dis-

53

aster to communities may not be as simple as it seems. Experiences with early warning have shown people perceive risk and
respond to it in many different ways, e.g. unwillingness to leave
their homes and properties to look for shelter, underestimating the
danger posed by the disaster risk, or simply not understanding the
early warning (Jeggle, 2003). Some attribute these responses to
differences in education, religion, cultural background, or socioeconomic position. Of course the early warning system should be
composed in such a way that it meets the various needs. This
involves getting to meet the local people and bridging the gap
between disaster professionals and people at grassroots level
(Jeggle, 2003).
There is a major role here for NGOs to fill the gap between
researchers and communities. As they know the local conditions,
they can assist with disseminating information at the community
level, preparing community actions, and establishing mechanisms
to link communities with policy-makers. But in order to do that,
they should have better and timely access to the scientific information, and be involved in the research and decision-making process
(Jeggle, 2003).
In general, early warning initiatives should, in the medium to
long term, aim to support countries in building and generating
their own local resources to increase their disaster prevention
capabilities. In the end, early warning should be brought to the
people all over the world to reduce the loss of human life and damage to property as much as possible.
There is vast room for improvement. Early warning practice could
greatly benefit from increased international collaboration on telecommunications for disaster prevention, public-private partnerships for preparedness and risk management at local community
levels, and social science and public information activities to
increase local awareness and response to early warnings (Jeggle,
2003).

c

54

Disaster risk prevention and adaptation as ways of achieving water
and food security

Climate change is having an impact on food and water security.
Variability in the frequency of rainfall and changes of mean temperatures will change the availability of water and will challenge the
existing agricultural practices. Water security, which in part determines food security, is defined as ‘the availability of an acceptable
quantity and quality of water for health livelihoods, ecosystems and
production, coupled with and acceptable level of water-related risks
to people, environments and economies’ (Grey and Sadoff, 2007).
According to Grey and Sadoff (2007) there are three typologies of
country levels of water security: (1) countries that have harnessed
hydrology; (2) countries that are hampered by hydrology; and (3)
countries that are hostage of hydrology, often the poorest countries.
They face ‘difficult’ hydrologies, which comprise high inter- and
intra- annual rainfall variability. To maintain or achieve water security both technological and institutional investments are needed.
Much can be learned from practices in the past to conserve and
distribute water in culturally and ecologically appropriate ways
(Grey and Sadoff, 2007).
On food security it is argued that access to technology determines a
farm's productivity, no matter how climate change impacts the
land and the climatic conditions. In the absence of such technology
and agricultural inputs such as improved seeds and fertilizers (a
new ‘Green Revolution’), poor farmers will be less able to adapt to
climate changes because they have fewer options in their agricultural system to sustain their productivity (Brown and Funk 2008).
A promising initiative has been taken by one of the biggest reinsurance companies in the world, Munich Re, which provides
weather-indexed insurance for crop failure (e.g. due to droughts) to
poor farmers in developing countries. A comparable scheme has
been set up in India by Microensure, which receives funding from
the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and uses comic books to
explain the workings of the arrangements to the local farmers.
Of course there is a lot to be learned from older cultures and their
ways of coping with changing climatic conditions, for example, the

55

Inca’s use of crop varieties, using crops resistant to heat, and dealing with water scarcity (Wojtkowski, 2008).
Prominent in addressing the current challenges of food security
in relation to climate change is the CGIAR Research Programme
on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS), in
which all 15 research centres of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) worked together. Their
first theme is ‘Adaptation to Progressive Climate Change’, in which
they will analyse and design processes to support adaptation of
farming systems in the face of future uncertainties of climate in
space and time. It is also a race with time – as they say ‘The intention here is to try and stay ahead of future change!’ The social, economic, cultural and institutional conditions for successful adaptation of farming systems will be included in the research (see
http://ccafs.cgiar.org/our-work/research-themes/progressive-adaptation)
Indeed, a holistic approach is indicated (CARE, 2011) and clean
water, the stability of the availability, and access to such resources
should be guaranteed by a strong government (Brown et al.,
2007), and the willingness of societies to change (Tompkins and
Adger, 2005).
For instance, adaptation measures to hurricanes could include
the availability of wind-resistant glass for windows. But it is not
enough that they are available. People at risk must also be able to
find out that these windows exist, purchase them, effectively install
and maintain them. If economic or social constraints do not permit
this, there will be a limited response to the adaptation measure.
Public policies, power relationships and cultural norms can also
play an important role in determining access to resources. According to CARE International, socially-excluded groups such as
women, children, persons suffering with HIV&AIDS and landless
people are the most vulnerable to climate change as they have a
limited access to food and water due to political and cultural
norms.
Mali is an example of how development assistance and promoting
equal access to food and water can help prevent and manage conflicts. Mali, as part of the Sahel region, experiences the extremes of

56

drought and flood, and has a history of armed conflict and humanitarian crises. Climate change has exacerbated the local conditions
since mid-1970s with the decline of Lake Faguibine. According to
a report by the IUCN, the region surrounding the Lake Faguibine
in the north of the country used to be a prosperous wetland system
(Andrade Perez et al., 2010). Agricultural and pastoral lifestyles
were sustained by its flooding regime. But recurrent droughts over
the past century have almost completely dried up the lake. As a
consequence hundreds of people have died, many have lost their
livestock, and thousands have been forced to leave. These movements didn’t occur without an increased competition for the
remaining resources, leading to the marginalization of the most
vulnerable groups. After a long history of unrest and with the reestablishment of peace, a series of initiatives to assist the return of
refugees, reconstruct social infrastructure, and introduce irrigated
agriculture began in 1995. The main projects were made possible
by the German Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit's
(GTZ) and the Mali Nord Programme in collaboration with the
European Union and the World Food Programme. The United
Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) has also been working
on the rehabilitation and sustainable management of the Lake
Faguibine system. It does so mostly by working at the community
level to strengthen civil society to prevent and control violent competition for the scarce resources. Hence, it is a real need to restore
the ecosystem to diminish conflicts and enhance cooperation
among competing groups (Andrade Perez et al., 2010,).

4.2 Best practices
Building resilience to climate variability and promoting food security:
The case of Mozambique
Mozambique is prone to experiencing considerable year-to-year
variability in rainfall. On average, there are 375 to 600 mm of
rainfall every year, with rains between October and November and
May to June. Extreme events are likely to increase over time, with
intervals of heavy rain and drought. These climate patterns have a

57

considerable impact on the livelihoods of people who depend on
agriculture. Even though rural populations are familiar with rainfall variability, extreme events such as the floodings in 1977 and
2001, and droughts in 1983-1984, 1994 and 2003, had serious
impacts on their livelihoods (Osbahr et al. 2008).
Research by Osbahr and fellow researchers describes the case of
Mozambique. This is one of the few countries in southern Africa
that has a relatively well-developed disaster preparedness plan
alongside a long-term poverty-alleviation policy (Osbahr et al.,
2008). Rural villages in Mozambique, especially those where the
population was displaced by the civil war and later returned, are
physically and economically isolated. One example of such a village
is Nwadjahane, which is dependent on subsistence farming,
including the production of cattle, chickens and pigs, and rainfed/irrigated cultivation. Therefore livelihoods are closely connected to the variability and productivity of the surrounding natural
resources.
The Government of Mozambique has endeavored to include disaster risk reduction and capacity-building in its policies. A
multidisciplinary group composed of various ministries was established to perform vulnerability mapping analysis and to collaborate
with external networks to provide early warning forecasts (Osbahr
et al., 2008). Very relevant was the integration of concerns about
disasters and climate change impacts into the development agenda.
In Mozambique, Government- led programmes are usually delivered in partnership with NGOs, e.g. the multi-donor ‘PROAGRI’
programme, coordinated by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development. The main activities of this programme were microfinance, and support for setting up small-scale farming in rural
areas through technical training, infrastructure development and
local organization. This programme later became a long-term project delivered at national and provincial levels. It emphasizes building local resilience to drought, food security and poverty-reduction.
This initiative is an example that successfully links spatial, temporal, jurisdictional, institutional, and management scales at different
levels (Osbahr et al., 2008).

58

Community-based disaster management in the Philippines: raising
awareness and empowering local people
Involving communities at risk in disaster management while raising awareness can be an effective way to reduce disaster risk and
help communities cope with climate change impacts. The Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies have developed Disaster Preparedness activities that ‘address everyday risks of communities
through programmes such as health, social welfare and first aid
activities’ (Kokawa, 2003). These activities aim to increase selfreliance, raise awareness of vulnerabilities and the root causes of
disasters, and develop skills. The activities are implemented with
the help of volunteer networks that have a good knowledge of the
local conditions and can easily interact with communities.
In the Philippines, a typhoon - and flooding - prone country, this
approach has been successfully implemented in high-risk communities. The programme works with both local government and
communities to ensure that development and mitigation strategies
are shared and sustained. The key areas addressed by this programme are dissemination of technical information, training, raising awareness of risks and vulnerability, accessing local knowledge
and resources, and mobilizing local communities (Allen, 2006).
With the training obtained, the communities develop hazard maps,
disaster action plans and build teams to be operational in networks
of focal points (Kokawa, 2003). Furthermore, Allen (2006)
observes that raising awareness contributes to increasing the willingness to cooperate in disaster preparedness initiatives of community members once they become knowledgeable of the vulnerability their livelihoods have to hazards. Raising awareness ‘as well
as fulfilling an educational function, it [...] engenders participation
in practical CBDP (community-based disaster preparedness)
initiatives’ (Allen, 2006).
The Community-Based Disaster Preparedness initiative requires
high levels of community participation; hence it is necessary that
the community enjoys a relatively high level of cohesion to yield
good results. In this way the community is in a better position to
collectively identify problems, take decisions and act on them, and
allocate resources (Allen, 2006).

59

Early Warning System in Bangladesh: Effectiveness through simplicity
and low technology
After a long history of severe cyclonic storms, Bangladesh has
improved its disaster management and response. On 15 November 2007 the cyclone Sidr – a category-5 equivalent tropical
cyclone on the Saffir-Simpson Scale, and the strongest named
cyclone in the Bay of Bengal – hit the coast of Bangladesh.
Even though the damages caused were severe and extensive, the
number of casualties was smaller compared to that of the cyclone
that hit Bangladesh in 1991 – 3,447 lives were lost in 2007 in
comparison to more than 138,000 in 1991. Many attribute this
improvement of the population's response to the early warning system that was put in place in response to the cyclone Sidr and that
resulted in mobilizing over 40,000 Red Crescent volunteers to
warn people through megaphones about the coming cyclone.
First, the authorities in Bangladesh were alerted about the
coming cyclone 72 hours before it made landfall. The WMO global
cyclone observatory fed data to the regional outpost at the Indian
Meteorological Office in New Delhi, which subsequently
communicated this to the Bangladesh Government. Once the
Government of Bangladesh received the alert, it passed it on to the
local Red Crescent Office. A network of 40,000 Red Crescent
volunteers, who had been specifically trained for this task, were
mobilized at the 15 affected districts (out of Bangladesh's 64). The
volunteers bicycled around the districts at risk and ordered the
population to enter the 1,800 disaster shelters that were built
along the coasts. By the time the cyclone indeed made landfall,
about 2 million people were already sheltered. One the most
peculiar characteristics of this early warning and response system
is the easy technology that was used. Bhupinder Tomar, Senior
Disaster Preparedness Officer at the International Federation of
the Red Cross and Red Crescent in Geneva, explains that the
project is centered on ‘preparing people for disasters by using
community-based volunteers who do everything from street theatre
to school education and lectures to women's groups’ (IRIN, 2007).

60

The volunteers are set up in various committees that focus on
different issues, such as warning, first aid, shelter and relief. When
a cyclone alarm goes off they go on their bikes and megaphones to
the streets to alert people.
This example of an early warning system is relevant because it
can be easily replicable. According to Tomar, the only important
factor to consider when implementing this system is that there
needs to be a fairly high frequency of disasters so that people
accept there is a genuine risk (IRIN, 2007). Indeed, a major study
revealed that 95 per cent of the surviving households of the
cyclone of 1991 were aware of the official cyclone warnings but
only 17 per cent of them responded by seeking shelter before the
landfall of the storm. Of those who did not respond, 45 per cent
did not believe the storm would be as severe as the warning made
it seem, 16 per cent did not understand the warning, and another
16 per cent was not able to reach shelter due to the strong winds
and floods (Twigg, 2003). In that year previous false alarms were
one of the main reasons for refusal to trust the warning, and many
were skeptic about having a cyclone striking at that time of the
year.
But Bangladesh still faces challenges in disaster preparedness
and disaster risk reduction. Preparedness remains patchy particularly in rural coastal areas where there is a lack of infrastructure.
According to Howell (2003) many rural people do not fully understand the signal system. Women in particular are the most vulnerable. They have serious problems in access to information and lack
preparation to face disasters partly due to the purdah culture –
which includes the seclusion of women from public observation by
wearing concealing clothes from head to toe and by the use of high
walls, curtains, and screens erected within their homes. Their isolation impedes them from interacting with others as a way of learning about a risk. In addition, women are not allowed to leave their
homes without the permission of their husbands, even to go to a
cyclone shelter (Howell, 2003). The statistics confirm these facts.
In the cyclone of 1970 the entire adult female population of the
island of Monpura was lost, and in 1991 the mortality rates were
significantly much higher for women and children than for men
(Howell, 2003).

61

In Bangladesh (and other countries) the NGO, Displacement
Solutions, plays an important role in assisting people displaced by,
amongst others, climate change, and in recovering lost housing,
land and property belongings (HLP). Displacement Solutions has
established a Global HLP Rights Expert Registry with over 125
experts who can be called upon in case of need to recover losses or
if compensation is required.

Water security
On water security there are many good and bad practices around
the world. A very sophisticated system of subterranean water
transport was developed in old Persia (the qanats) and found its
way to other parts of the world (figure 1).

Figure 1: Qanat Technology Diffusion Model.

Of course current demand for water due to population growth,
urbanization, industrialization and the impacts of climate change
require different solutions to water security. But it does not hurt to
look at the good practices of the past, not only technological, but
also institutional, so as to provide equitable distribution of the
62

water, to receive inspiration for the present and future challenges.
Worrisome is the pumping of water out of aquifers with fossil
water, not only in the Middle East, North Africa, China and India,
but also in the United States, where the Ogallala fossil water aquifer is running out, compromising the bread basket function of the
United States on the world food market. Also the Netherlands –
with its difficult hydrology – has developed interesting experiences,
which have been replicated elsewhere. The safe settlement and
survival of the Dutch population has required highly sophisticated
water infrastructure and corresponding institutions, such as the
water boards with their own parliaments, which were important
elements of the foundation of modern Dutch democracy (Grey and
Sadoff, 2007, 554). As part of the Netherlands development cooperation the experience and expertise of the Dutch water sector is
now being applied in the delta areas of, for example, Egypt (Nile),
Bangladesh (Ganges/Brahmaputra), Indonesia (Jakarta Delta),
Mozambique (Inkomati Delta), and Vietnam (Mekong), in order to
help defend these vital economic areas in the countries against sealevel rise, (water) pollution and to assist with development of the
port facilities. This programme is called Water Mondiaal.
Irrigation can be a mixed blessing as the following example from
India shows. Characterized by its monsoon, India experiences
extreme intra-annual rainfall variability. Nearly 70 per cent of the
rural population depends on agriculture for subsistence and
employment, influencing their livelihoods and increasing their
vulnerability to climate variability (Kumar, 2003). The expansion
of irrigation is seen by many as the key to sustaining agricultural
production and food security. But the Government’s investments
in water infrastructure have had a positive impact on the economy.
According to Grey and Sadoff (2007) there is a direct correlation
between investments in irrigation and significant declines in
poverty. Irrigated districts have an average of 25 per cent poverty
rates, whereas those lacking irrigation show an average of 70 per
cent poverty rate (Grey and Sadoff, 2007). However, irrigation systems should not be taken as the best possible solution to achieve
water security. The intensive use of irrigation can cause the degradation of land and water resources. Thus, irrigation should not be

63

treated as a long-term solution (Reddy, 2002, 2). Furthermore, the
Indian Government has been making efforts to de-link the country’s economy from its climatic vulnerability by shifting away from
agriculture and betting on manufacturing, communications and
transport. The challenge of achieving reliable and sustainable
access to water, however, still remains.
Another good example of water security policies by improving
institutional arrangements is South Africa. Investments in water
management infrastructure began during the apartheid period
with the purpose of promoting the farming, mining and financial
sectors. These investments were aimed only to serve the white
population, while the rest of the country was left undeveloped.
Although highly inequitable, those investments reduced vulnerability and laid a basic infrastructure base.
With the end of apartheid water management policies have an
emphasis on equity. Riparian laws, which tie the right to use water
to the ownership of land along rivers and groundwater aquifers,
have been abolished. The South African Government is now the
custodian of all water bodies and no ownership of water is allowed,
except on a contact basis when they are allocated by the State
(Reddy, 2002). Another example is the Vaal River System, which is
located in a semi-arid region that experiences extremes of rainfall
and drought. This system includes inter-basin transfers with seven
river systems and sixteen dams. It is regulated by a law that states
that specific flow allocations in each river basin for basic services
are preferably directed to the poor and for in-stream environmental
flows, before other allocations are considered (Grey and Sadoff,
2007).

64

4.3 Capacity development
The UN Development Programme (UNDP) has defined the concept of capacity as ‘the ability of individuals, institutions and societies to perform functions, solve problems, and set and achieve
objectives in a sustainable manner’ (UNDP, 2009).
How can we do this in the face of climate change and the impacts
it may have on migration and conflict? Individuals have to be made
aware of what is happening, what may be coming towards them
and what options they have in their various capacities (at home, at
work, as a consumer, as a voter, as a politician) for preventative
action and to cope with inevitable climate change and is impacts.
Climate change and water stress will play out differently in the
various parts of the world and will be perceived differently according to the specific ecological, political, economic and cultural conditions. The Inuit communities in the Arctic Circle perceive it differently to the pastoralists in the Horn of Africa or the fishermen
in the mangrove areas between India and Bangladesh. The extreme
droughts, floods, cyclones and firestorms in Australia have
prompted the Climate Institute (based in Melbourne and Sydney)
to look into the public and mental health aspects of the impacts of
climate change in the country. A recent report by the Climate Institute says, ‘The emerging burden of climate-related impacts on
community morale and mental health –bereavement, depression,
post-event disorders, and the tragedy of self-harm – is large, especially in vulnerable rural areas’ (The Climate Institute, 2011).
Relocation and migration towards cities is already occurring and
will increase in the future. Adequate counseling to prepare individuals and communities to cope with both the slow-onset impacts
and the extreme events will have to be provided by public authorities and NGOs.
It is not possible to give a full overview of all capacity development issues related to the theme of this paper as they deal with so
many aspects of human behavior on all levels, from the local to the
global. Only a few concluding observations and recommendations
will be given here.
Awareness-raising

65

This will have to be done around the world with all the diversity of
experiences and perceptions. It is worrisome that in parts of the
world where mitigation should be a political priority, climate
science denial seems to be on the rise. People are unwilling to
make the needed changes in lifestyle, especially those associated
with high-energy inputs, and then discard the science behind those
changes. The spread of this denial in the United States makes it
unlikely that they will come with a strong and pro-active climate
position to the upcoming negations on a successor to the Kyoto
Protocol at the 17th Conference of the Parties in Durban. As
already indicated, a lack of a strong mitigation agenda in the coming years will aggravate the adaptation challenges with resulting
impacts on migration and conflicts. Positive, however, is that many
young entrepreneurs see their future in designing and commercializing sustainability, and the same holds for many of the existing
major corporations. Part of it is sometimes greenwash, but those in
the private sector with a longer term perspective, including many
(pension) fund managers, feel that in the end only climate-sound
investments will pay back.
In the United States, awareness amongst the military about the
security threat of climate impacts has risen over the past years.
They have concerns about volatile areas in Central and South Asia,
about the control of the Arctic, and about sea-level rise as it affects
their low-lying naval bases on the coast of the United States and in
the Indian and Pacific Oceans. Many also realise that the United
States armed forces, as by far the biggest consumer of fossil fuel in
the world, is very much part of the problem. Reducing the bootprint is a growing focus of attention.
More awareness is needed of the special vulnerability of women
and children to impacts of climate change and water stress.

66

Institutional change
Institutions, like governments with their ministries, will change
when society and social perceptions change, but it may take time.
Organisations, especially big organisations, are resistant to change,
because of bureaucratic procedures, traditional career patterns and
sometimes corruption by short- term interests. Historically
unprecedented rises in temperature and frequencies of extreme
weather events require new thinking and collaboration within and
between ministries. How can we build in proper and timely reactions to early warning signals about coming droughts or floods?
How can we learn from best practices in other countries and to
overcome the syndrome of ‘not invented over here’?
The UNFCCC decisions contain provisions for financial and
technological cooperation between the various countries. In the
field of forests, the so-called Reduction of Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD) allows transfers of funds only if a
strict Monitoring, Reporting and Verification system is put in
place. These entail the kind of institutional innovations needed to
have governments mainstream climate change, water stress and
the associated social impacts in their policies.
Also the traditional development agencies such as the World
Bank, the regional development banks and the bilateral donors
have to ‘climate-proof’ their projects with the recipient countries
and have mitigation and adaptation options and issues explicitly
taken up in the environmental and social assessments which are
part of project development. See also Klein (2007).
Independent monitoring of relevant adaptation factors such as
forest cover, wetlands, mangroves, and soil moisture is a vital tool
to verify compliance with international environmental agreements
as a precondition to prevent conflicts and to define situations in
which environmental migrants are entitled to international assistance. An important role is played here by the Soil Moisture and
Ocean Salinity (SMOS) satellite programme of the European Space
Agency (ESA). There is also a clear role for The Hague in its international capacity as Legal Capital of the World with its courts, tribunals and academic centres of expertise especially on the compliance and enforcement of international law. In The Hague, scien-

67

tific evidence of climate change, observations of social effects and
insights in applicable legal arrangements should be brought
together to help lay the basis for the practical solutions which have
to be finalized and implemented at the local level.

Societal change
Some societies are more at risk than others and some societies
have a higher liability to prevent further climate change, because of
their past, than others. That liability should also stretch towards
assisting vulnerable societies in coping with social and humanitarian impacts of adaptation. As mentioned above, both discouraging
and encouraging signs can be observed. While the climate denialists and ecologically destructive short-term interests still are formidable obstacles to global, national and local sustainability, the growing scientific evidence of climate change, water stress and its
impacts on conflict and migration and the growing body of initiatives, experiences and best practices to handle these impacts in a
socially equitable way plus the enthusiasm of young entrepreneurs,
farmers and students all over the world, give hope.

References
Allen, K.M. (2006) Community-Based Disaster Preparedness and
Climate Adaptation: Local Capacity Building in the Philippines;
in: Disasters, vol 30 (1), pp 81–101.
Aminzadeh, S.C. (2007) A Moral Imperative: The Human Rights
Implications of Climate Change; in: Hastings International and
Comparative Law Review, vol 30 (2), pp 231–266.
Ammer, M. (2009) Climate Change and Human Rights: The
Status of Climate Change Refugees in Europe; Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Human Rights, Austria. Research project on
Climate Change as a contribution to the Swiss Initiative to
Commemorate the 60th Anniversary of the UDHR.
Andrade Perez, A., B. Herrera Fernandez and R. Cazzolla Gatti
(eds) (2010) Building Resilience to Climate Change: Ecosystem-

68

based Adaptation and Lessons from the Field; in: Ecosystem
Management Series, no. 9; IUCN, Gland.
Ashton, P.J. (2002) Avoiding Conflicts over Africa’s Water
Resources; in: AMBIO: Journal of the Human Environment, vol
31 (3), pp 236–242.
Beg, N., J.Corfee Morlot, O. Davidson, Y. Afrane-Okesse, L.Tyani,
F. Denton, Y. Sokona, J.P. Thomas, E. Lèbre La Rovere, J.K.
Parikh, K. Parikh and A.A. Rahman (2002) Linkages Between
Climate Change and Sustainable Development; in: Climate Policy, vol 2, pp 129–144.
Biermann, F. and I. Boas (2010) Preparing for a Warmer World:
Towards a Global Governance System to Protect Climate Refugees; in: Global Environmental Politics, vol 10 (1), pp 60–88.
Billon, P. Le (2001) The Political Ecology of War: Natural
Resources and Armed Conflicts; in: Political Geography, vol 20,
pp 561–584.
Bronen, R. (2009) Forced Migration of Alaskan Indigenous
Communities Due to Climate Change: Creating a Human
Rights Response; in: A.O. Smith and X.Shen (eds) Linking Environmental Change, Migration and Social Vulnerability,
SOURCE-Publication series of UNU-EHS, no. 12; UNU-EHS,
Bonn.
Brooks, N. and N. Adger (2004) Assessing and Enhancing Adaptive Capacity; in B. Lim and E. Spanger- Siegfield (eds) Adaptation Policy Frameworks for Climate Change: Developing Strategies, Policies and Measures; Cambridge University.
Brown, M. and C. Funk (2008). Food Security Under Climate
Change; in: Science, vol 319 (5863), pp 580–581.
Brown, O., A. Hammill, and R. Mcleman (2007) Climate Change
as the 'New' Security Threat: Implications for Africa; in: International Affairs, vol 83(6), pp 1141–1154.
Burton, I., E. Diringer and J. Smith (2006) Adaptation to Climate
Change: International Policy Options. Pew Center on Global
Climate Change.
Campbell, K. M., J. Gulledge, J.R. McNeill, J. Podesta, P. Ogden, L.
Fuerth, R. J. Woolsey, A.T.J. Lennon, J. Smith, R. Weitz and D.
Mix (2007) The Age of Consequences: The Foreign Policy and
National Security Implications of Global Climate Change. Center

69

for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) and Center for a
New American Security (CNAS).
CARE (2011) Adaptation and Food Security. CARE International
Climate Change Brief.
Carney, S., J. Miklian and K. Hoelscher (2011) Fortress India:
Why is Delhi Building a New Berlin Wall to Keep Out its Bangladeshi Neighbors?; in: Foreign Policy, July–August 2011.
CIREFCA (1989) Principles and Criteria for the Protection of and
Assistance to Central American Refugees, Returnees and Displaced Persons in Latin America. CIREFCA/89/9.
CNA Corporation (2007) National Security and the Threat of Climate Change. Security and Climate.
Cordaid (2009) Towards a Resilient Future. Experiences with
Community Managed Disaster Risk Reduction and Climate
Change Adaptation; Cordaid.
Denton, F., Y. Sokona and J.P. Thomas (2000) Climate Change
and Sustainable Development Strategies in the Making: What
Should West African Countries Expect?; in: Environnement et
Développement du Tiers Monde (ENDA-TM), Dakar, Sénégal.
OECD.
European Commission (2008) Strengthening the Global approach
to Migration: Increasing Coordination, Coherence and Synergies, Commission Communication to the European Parliament,
the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and
the Committee of the Regions; COM (2008) 611/3.
Falkenmark, M. (1986) Fresh Water – Time for a Modified
Approach; in: Ambio, vol 15 (4), pp 194–200.
Forest
for Climate (2011) Asia-Pacific at risk from climate
migration: report.
Gleick, P.H. (1993) Water and Conflict: Fresh Water Resources
and International Security; in: International Security, vol 18 (1),
pp 79–112.
Grunewald, F. (1995) From Prevention to Rehabilitation: Action
Before, During and After the Crisis. The Experience of the ICRC
in Retrospect; in: International Review of the Red Cross, no.
306.

70

Hoque Patwary, O. (2009) Climate Change and Security. The
Security Dimensions of Climate Change; in: Issue Brief 7; Bangladesh Institute of Peace and Security Studies (BIPSS), pp 7–14.
Howell, P. (2003) Indigenous Early Warning Indicators of
Cyclones: Potential Application in Coastal Bangladesh; in: Benfield Hazard Research Centre, Disaster Studies Working Paper
6.
IOM. (2009) Migration, Climate Change and the Environment.
Key Figures.
IRIN (2007) Bangladesh: Megaphones Save Thousands.
Jeggle, T. (2003) Bringing Early Warning to the People – Public
and Partnership Responsibilities for Early Warning; in: J.
Zschau, A.N. Küppers (eds) Early Warning Systems for Natural
Disaster Reduction; Springer, Berlin.
Klein, R.J.T. (2007) Portfolio screening to Support the Mainstreaming of Adaptation to Climate Change Into Developing
Assistance, Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research, Working Paper 102.
Kokawa, N. (2003) Community Based Disaster Preparedness. Red
Cross/Red Crescent Approach and Cases. The International
Conference on Total Disaster Risk Management.
Kolmannskog, V.O. (2008) Future Floods of Refugees. A Comment on Climate Change, Conflict and Forced Migration. Norwegian Refugee Council.
Kumar, M.D. (2003) Food Security and Sustainable Agriculture in
India: The Water Management Challenge; Working Paper 60:
Colombo Sri Lanka: International Water Management Institute.
Lopez, A. (2007) The Protection of Environmentally-Displaced
Persons in International Law; in: Environmental Law, vol 37, pp
365–409.
McLeman, R. (2006) Migration Out of 1930s Rural Eastern Oklahoma: Insights for Climate Change Research. Center for Great
Plains Studies, University of Nebraska-London.
Mirza, M.M.Q. (2003) Climate Change and Extreme Weather
Events: Can Developing Countries Adapt?; in: Climate Policy, vol
3, pp 233–248.

71

Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs (2007–2008) Norwegian
Policy on the Prevention of Humanitarian Crises, Report No. 9,
to the Storting.
OAS (1984) Cartagena Declaration on Refugees, November 22,
1984, Annual Report of the Inter- American Commission on
Human Rights. Doc. OEA/Ser.L/V/II.66/doc.10, rev. 1.
OAU (1969) African Union Convention of the Organisation for
African Unity (OAU) governing the specific aspects of refugee
problems in Africa, UNTS, No. 14691, ratified by 45 States.
Oliver-Smith, A. and X. Shen (eds) (2009) Linking Environmental
Change, Migration and Social Vulnerability, SOURCE-Publication series of UNU-EHS, No. 12, UNU-EHS, Bonn.
OHCHR (1951) Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees,
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, 189 UNTS 150.
OHCHR (1954) Convention Relating to the Status of Stateless
Persons. Adopted 28 September 1954 by a Conference of
Plenipotentiaries Convened by Economic and Social Council
Resolution 526 A (XVII).
Osbahr, H. C. Twyman, W.N. Adger, and D.S.G. Thomas (2008)
Effective Livelihood Adaptation to Climate Change Disturbance:
Scale Dimensions of Practice in Mozambique; in: Geoforum, vol
39, pp 1951–1964.
Osofsky, H.M. (2005) Learning from Environmental Justice: A
New Model for International Environmental Rights; in: Standford Environmental Law Journal, vol 24 (1), pp 1–74.
Parliamentary Assembly (2008) Environmentally Induced Migration and Displacement: A 21st Century Challenge, Doc. 11785,
Committee on Migration, Refugees and Population.
Parry, M.L., O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden, and
C.E. Hanson (eds) (2007) Climate Change 2007: Impacts,
Adaptation and Vulnerability. IPCC Fourth Assessment Report,
Working group II;Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Rahman, A.A., A. Mozaharul, S. Shafiqul Alam, Md. R. Uzzaman,
M. Rashid and G. Rabbani (2007) UNDP Human Development
Report 2007: Fighting climate change; Human solidarity in a
divided world. Background Paper on Risks, Vulnerability and

72

Adaptation in Bangladesh, Human Development Report Office,
Occasional Paper, UNDP, pp 12.
Reddy, R.V. (2002) Water Security and Management. Lessons
from South Africa; in: Economic and Political Weekly, vol 37 (28),
pp 2878–2881.
Renaud, F., J. Bogardi, O. Dun, and K. Warner (2007) Control,
Adapt or Flee. How to Face Environmental Migration?; in: Interdisciplinary Security Connections’ Publication Series of UNU-EHS,
No, 5; UNU-EHS, Bonn.
Reuveny, R. (2007) Climate Change-induced Migration and Violent Conflict: in: Political Geography, vol 26, pp 656–673.
Shaw, A. et al. (2009) Making Local Futures Tangible – Synthesizing, Downscaling, and Visualizing Climate Change Scenarios for
Participatory Capacity Building; in: Global Environmental Change,
vol 19 (4), pp 447–463.
Schellnhuber, H.J., R. Schubert, and S. Rahmstorf (2007) Climate
Change as a Security Risk, German Advisory Council on Global
Change (WBGU); Earthscan, London.
Schipper, L. and M. Pelling (2006) Disaster Risk, Climate Change,
and International Development: Scope for, and Challenger to,
Integration; in: Disasters, vol 30 (1), pp 19–37.
Security Council (2011) SC/10332, 6587th Meeting, 20 July
2011.
Smit, B., I. Burton, R.J.T. Klein and J. Wandel (2000) An Anatomy
of Adaptation to Climate Change and Variability; in: Climatic
Change, vol 45, pp 223–251.
Smit, B. and O. Pilifosova (2001) Adaptation to Climate Change in
the Context of Sustainable Development and Equity; in:
McCarthy, J., O. Canziani, N.A. Leary, D.J. Dokken and K.S.
White (eds) Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability; Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Stavropoulou, M. (2008) Drowned in definitions?; in: Forced
Migration Review, vol 31, pp 11–12.
Stal, M. and K. Warner (2009) The Way Forward. Researching the
Environment and Migration Nexus. Research brief based on the
outcomes of the 2nd Expert Workshop on Climate Change,
Environment, and Migration, July 2009; Germany: UNU-EHS.

73

Suliman, M. (2007) Ecology, Politics and Violent Conflict; in:
Respect, Sudanese Journal for Human Right’s Culture and Issues of
Cultural Diversity, vol 1, pp 1–25.
The Climate Institute (2011) A Climate of Suffering: the real cost
of living with inaction on climate change; The Climate Institute,
Melbourne and Sydney.
Tompkins, E.L. and W.N. Adger (2005) Defining Response Capacity to Enhance Climate Change Policy; in: Environmental Science
& Policy, vol 8, pp 562–571.
Twigg, J. (2003) The Human Factor in Early Warnings: Risk Perception and Appropriate Communications; in: J. Zschau and A.
Küppers (eds) Early Warning Systems for Natural Disaster
Reduction; Springer, Berlin.
UNDP (2009) Capacity Development: A UNDP Premier. New
York: United Nations Development Programme.
UNEP (2011) UNEP Chief Addresses UN Security Council Debate
on Climate Change and Security. Address by the UN Under-Secretary-General and UNEP Executive Director Achim Steiner at
UN Security Council Debate on the Impact of Climate Change
on Maintaining International Peace and Security, 20 July 2011.
UNFCCC (2010) Outcome of the work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on long-term Cooperative Action under the Convention,
CP 16.
UNHCR (2008) Global Trends 2007: Refugees, Asylum-seekers,
Returnees, Internally Displaced and Stateless Persons. A report
prepared by the Field Information and Coordination Support
Section (FICSS), Division of Operational services at UNHCR
Headquarters in Geneva.
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) and Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre
(IDMC) (2009) Monitoring Disaster Displacement in the Context of Climate Change.
UNU-EHS (2011) Submission by the United Nations University
Institute for Environment and Human Security (UNU-EHS in
Bonn) SBI Work Program on Loss and Damage: Ideas for work
streams and areas of discussion up to and beyond COP18.
Vordzorgbe, S. (2007) Early Warning as a Tool for Climate
Change Adaptation in National Programmes for Adaptation

74

(NAPAs). Discussion paper presented at workshop by UNITAR
and ENDA, Senegal.
Westing, A. (1992) Environmental Refugees: A growing Category
of Displaced Persons; in: Environmental Conservation, vol 19 (3),
pp 201207.
Westra, L. (2009) Environmental Justice and Rights of Ecological
Refugees. London: Earthscan. Wojtkowski, P. (2008). "Ensuring
Food Security", in: Science 2, May 2008, pp 611–612.
World Bank. (2006) Managing Climate Risk: Integrating Adaptation into World Bank Group Operations, Global Environmental
Facility.

75

76

Climate change-induced migrations
A research and capacity-building agenda from a
human security perspective
Rolain Borel

This keynote speech is dedicated to the memory of Prof. Mahmoud El
Zain Hamid, who passed away on the eve of this symposium, while
teaching at the University for Peace. Prof. Hamid should have been the
one presenting this keynote speech and indeed inspired several of its
leading ideas.

Initial (bittersweet) remarks
I perceive that today’s water stress, conflict and migration situation
is largely a story of:

Climate change
denial

global
governance

exclusion

injustice

poor resource
management

un-sustainability

‘over’-population
and…

long-term feedbacks.

In this paper, I will draw from our experience in disaster risk
reduction and disaster response to show the analogies with situaRolain Borel, Professor Emeritus, University for Peace.

77

tions that may arise out of climate change. The science and
research and capacity-building aspects of these issues will be analysed.
There are a few elements that we consider particularly important
for this symposium, even if I am not sure that there is a definite
UPEACE position or consensus approach to these topics.2 Among
these important issues we would favor human security and human
rights as compared to state-centric approaches. There is clear link
between climate change and human rights, for example the right to
life and the right not to be displaced; a link that the international
community has been slow to recognise (Atapattu, 2010). While
migrations are mostly seen as problematic (for states and people)
we should not forget that they can also be considered as a human
right.
In addition, the debates about the definitions of several concepts
such as ‘natural’ or ‘man-made’, ‘migrant’, and ‘across borders’
seem to be driven by the notion of ‘what is possible’ rather than
‘what is right’. For example, the exclusion of environmental IDP’s
from the international conventions seems to be based on the consideration of an overwhelming task, rather than on the substantive
rights issue. Maybe we should distinguish between ‘what is
needed’ and ‘what is possible’ and do it in stages...
Environmental refugees are a new phenomenon (maybe not completely new, but the magnitude and frequency is probably much
greater than in the past). Therefore a new perspective needs to be
envisaged: one that challenges the state-centric views and
addresses the human security elements of the situation. We should
therefore consider the issues of environmental justice from the
perspective of the displaced persons and consequently adopt a
stronger human rights approach.
In addition, focusing the attention away from exclusive statecentric issues would allow us to emphasise a solidarity approach in
2

The substantial contributions of Prof. M. Hamid and Prof. M. Kanade in this regard are
hereby thankfully acknowledged.

78

climate justice in accordance with Martin (2010), who reminds us
that the essence of solidarity can already be identified in a number
of different principles and mechanisms present within the legal
climate change framework. And then Baskin (2009) also considers
that ‘might needs right’. Is it naïve? Maybe, but in the case of climate change even the powerful need a genuinely global solution,
which cannot be achieved without an engagement with justice
(Baskin, 2009).
The distinction between the causation of man-made vs. natural
drivers of migrations is another source of concern. Whether
migrants are victims of rights violations or of misfortune seems to
be the criteria for deciding if certain migrants are considered ‘climate change refugees’ or not, and therefore qualified recipients of
international help and interventions. This distinction is clearly
absurd.

Disasters (‘fast’ and ‘slow’) as a model of the problems and
approaches that will be needed to anticipate/respond to climate
change
“Advocacy and humanitarian organisations that have traditionally focused on conflict-induced forced displacement have expanded
their scope of work to climate change, disasters, and displacement.
Additionally, organisations typically focusing on environmental
issues are now including displacement induced by climate change
in their agendas”. (Albuja and Cavelier, 2011).
There are several analogies between disaster risk reduction and
disaster response initiatives and those that try to address climate
change. We pose that the latter may in general learn from the former.

79

Both need a preventive approach
States have the obligation under international human rights law to
protect rights by guaranteeing the entire ‘cycle of protection’
(Albuja and Cavelier, 2011). Whether an obligation or not, in reality, the preventive approaches are vastly underfunded, because the
‘response’ types of mechanisms are much more visible and redeem
higher electoral votes. It is likely that the same phenomenon will,
relatively speaking, also occur in the case of climate change
impacts.

Need to place the risks in a broader context
The risks from natural and man-made hazards, as well as those
arising from the climate change process, need to be placed in the
context of the multiple ‘social hazards' that a large majority of the
world population face on a daily basis (such as overcrowding; local
violence in all its manifestations – domestic, gangs, police, etc. -;
accidents; environmental injustice; joblessness; landlessness;
political and economic exclusion and marginalisation, etc.) (Borel
et al., 2011). As in the case of disasters, it is likely that the inertia
of hiding these recurrent risks so-to-say ‘under the carpet’ is quite
large.

Monitoring challenge
In a similar fashion to disasters arising from natural hazards, large
events attract more international attention, but many small events
cause more suffering in total (Lavell, 2003). The challenge is to
fully account for the impacts to of all those small events. This task
will be especially difficult when considering that most of the disasters that may arise out of climate change are likely to be ‘slow’, i.e.
those that are created over longer periods of ‘gestation’ and out of
the conjunction of multiple sources.

80

Disasters/climate change and conflicts
There are plenty of diverging evidences, whether disasters contribute to more conflicts or more peace. While the deciding factors
each lie in the individual contexts, the balance seems however to
weigh heavier in the direction of a negative impact. This being
said, catastrophic descriptions of future climate change conflicts
don’t seem to match the existing knowledge (‘know-how’) in conflict transformation and the fact that conflicts may arise does not
automatically mean that they will be violent, as many environmental conflicts of today are in fact non-violently managed and
there is no reason to believe that this know-how will disappear
(Borel, 2012).

Research agenda
Approaches
Need for local hard data – Even if some global phenomena might
not be understandable to isolated local communities, and such
communities might be unknowingly hit by these phenomena, local
scientific knowledge is very relevant particularly in relation to the
global climate changes. The impact of these global changes can
only be understood if data from various regions and localities are
collected and analysed scientifically.3
Scientific perspective needs to incorporate local knowledge – However,
addressing the impact of these global phenomena that are understandable only through scientific scenarios is, interestingly, viewed
to be only effective when incorporating the place-based forms of
knowledge—indigenous and traditional forms of knowledge. Like
in the case of big disasters, which are the sum of many localised
disasters, climate change, a truly global phenomenon, will manifest
its impacts in many localities, where a different blend of localised
adaptation and mitigation measures will play their role. With this
situation in mind, it is evident that local knowledge will be of
3

M. Hamid, personal communication, 2011.

81

paramount importance. A recent publication on Darfur epitomises
this trend (Leroy, 2009).
Need to ‘delicately’ understand the systems (from within) – Such studies should be multiplied, in order to avoid the recurrence of ‘development’ or humanitarian aid interventions that, out of ignorance
of the delicate balances that take place in vulnerable environments,
behave like a bull in a glass shop. Counterintuitive behaviours
seem to be the rule rather than the exception. The massive digging
of wells as a ‘response’ to drought and with the intent of settling
down transhumant pastoralist populations in the Sahel in the
1970s is an illustrative example of a type of intervention that only
led to their added vulnerability by counteracting their traditional
migrations patterns in search of better grazing grounds.

Priority topics
Migration as adaptation – Whether migrations are a sign of positive
adaptation or an indicator of failure is a matter of debate (Asapattu,
2010; Leroy, 2009). Climate change may be an important future
push factor, but its effects have to be placed in the context of significant pull factors as well, which may have little to do with climate change. The tremendous rural migration to the cities in Latin
America in the 20th century and in China nowadays cannot be
solely attributed to changes in agricultural production patterns and
in rural livelihood, but mostly to the ‘attractiveness’ of the cities,
which offer better education, health, jobs, etc. Tarekegn (2009)
reminds us about the positive elements of migration and about
migratory fluxes that have been there all the time as part of the
local adaptations to climate variability. In addition, outmigration
may also alleviate ecological pressure (Leroy, 2009).
Some scholars believe that there are still insufficient data and,
before continuing the specific debate on this matter, more research
is needed4 with a greater focus on distress migrations that can be
more confidently related to climate change issues.
4

See: http://www.gfmd.org.

82

Notion and numbers of environmental or climate change refugees,
migrants and internally displaced people (IDPs) – The emphasis of
the present symposium is on people who migrate across borders,
but the most need seems to refer to IDPs. In the view of the widely
varied present estimates and of the lack of precision that relates to
the definition of these different categories, there is a strong need to
qualify and quantify them better.
‘To stay or not to stay’ – Martin (2010) reminds us of the great
advantage that we can derive from the identification and critical
analysis of adaptation strategies that allow people to stay, as well as
from the identification of resettlement strategies that protect people’s lives and livelihoods at their new location.
Relationship between climate change, migration and conflict – As indicated above, there is still a lot to be learned about the likelihood of
conflicts arising out of climate change. If disasters are a good
‘model’, we sense that quasi-invariable multi-factors are at stake.
While there is some anticipation that environmental degradation
due to climate change may be responsible for future conflicts, scarcity and diminished carrying capacity not always explain conflicts,
as systems of power and access, which are rather independent
from climatic effects, seem to be more relevant (Evans, 2011).
The possible impacts of environmental changes on human mobility are a subject of debate that needs clarification by more field
studies.5 Furthermore, so does the relationship between
migrations and conflicts. While conflicts seem to restrict
migrations (Leroy, 2009), additional conflict may occur when
incoming people don’t recognise local resource use rules (Ahmed,
2009; Manger, 2009).

5

See: http://www.ehs.unu.edu/file/get/8538.

83

Capacity-building
Out of so many issues that require deeper analysis and field data
(as an ‘essential complement to’ – and I am tempted to say ‘instead
of predominantly’- theoretical considerations), let me mention
three topics that should receive more attention in capacity-building
efforts:

Appreciation for diversity, dialogue and synergies among various forms
of knowledge
The need for local interventions requires improving local capacities. This should not be done by solely trying to graft scientific
knowledge, assuming it really exists, into the local setting but by
valuing and integrating indigenous and traditional forms of knowledge that may help producing better informed policies. Such an
approach requires incorporating inputs both from ‘above’ and from
‘below’ and facilitating a truly transformative education. The
Bangladesh case (Background document 2012) shows how difficult such an approach is. However, it is not impossible, as demonstrated in the case of La Masica in Honduras during the occurrence
of Hurricane Mitch in 1998 (Lavell, 2003).

Local capacity to monitor and assess migration issues that may be
related to environmental change
The weaknesses of the research efforts in the migration-climate
change link calls for additional approaches. One of those would be
to involve more and more local actors in observing and evaluating
the processes and in this manner contribute to their understanding
from different angles. Of course such an effort will not be fruitful
if the local actors are not trained in monitoring and assessment.

84

Local capacity for governance, and conflict transformation
We have seen before that existing conflicts that arise (at least
partly) from environmental change issues are often resolved without violence, because there is generally enough know-how to transform them peacefully. Local capacities are however still insufficient
both at the level of local conflicts and especially at the higher level
of intergovernmental negotiations that invariably leave local actors
out, even when they are directly involved, for example in the case of
transboundary issues, such as ‘Peace Parks’. This is particularly
important as climate change in all likelihood will manifest itself
across boundaries.

Bibliography
Ahmed, A.G.M. (2009) Climate change as a crucial factor in the
Darfur Crisis; in: Marcel Leroy (ed) Environment and conflict in
Africa. University for Peace; Addis Ababa, pp 89–98.
Albuja S. and I. Cavelier (2011) Protecting People Displaced by
Disasters in the Context of Climate Change: Challenges from a
Mixed Conflict/Disaster Context; in: Tulane Environmental Law
Journal, vol 24, pp 239–252.
Atapattu, S. (2010) Climate change, human rights, and forced
migration: implications for international law; in: Winsconsin
International Law Journal, vol 27, no 3, pp 607–636.
Background Paper (2012) Climate Change, Water Stress, Conflict
and Migration; this symposium publication.
Baskin, J. (2009) The impossible necessity of climate justice?; in:
Melbourne Journal of International Law, vol 10.
Borel, R. (in press) Climate Change, Conflict and Cooperation at
the Local Level. Presentation at the International Seminar
‘Climate Change & Peace: the effects of Climate Change on
Global Peace and Security & its Humanitarian Dimension’,
Fundació Cultura de Pau-Barcelona, Barcelona, November
2009.

85

Borel R., S. Latham, M. Hamid and R. Muggah (2011) Social Risk
Reduction (SRR) Indicator Matrix. World Vision International:
San José.
Evans, A. (2011) Resource scarcity, climate change and the risk of
violent conflict; in: World Development Report 2011: Conflict,
Security and Development. Center on International Cooperation,
New York University: New York.
Lavell, A. (2003) Regional programme for risk management in
Central America: ideas and notions relating to concept and practice. UNDP/CEPREDENAC: Panamá.
Leroy, M. (2009) Introduction: in: Marcel Leroy (ed.) Environment
and conflict in Africa, pp 1–10; University for Peace, Addis
Ababa.
Manger, L. (2009) Resource based conflicts in Western Sudan.
Some reflections on the role of the state; in: Marcel Leroy (ed)
Environment and conflict in Africa; pp. 99–109, University for
Peace, Addis Ababa.
Martin, S. (2010) Climate change, migration, and governance; in:
Global Governance, vol 16. pp 397–414.
Tarekegn, B. (2009) Pastoralism and adaptation to climate change;
in: Marcel Leroy (ed) Environment and conflict in Africa; pp 170–
180, University for Peace, Addis Ababa.

86

Water stress, conflict and migration in
South Asia
Major General ANM Muniruzzaman (Retd)

Introduction
At the outset of the twenty-first century, climate change has
appeared as one of the greatest challenges to international peace
and security. It is seriously affecting hundreds of millions of
people today and in the coming decades those affected will likely
more than double – making it the greatest emerging humanitarian
and security challenge of our time. Climate change acts as a threat
multiplier for instability in some of the most volatile regions of the
world. Projected climate change will seriously aggravate already
marginal living standards in many Asian, African, and Middle
Eastern nations, causing widespread political instability and conflict. The matter is thus not one of individually occurring, monocausal crises and conflicts, but rather one of a great number of
destabilising, mutually amplifying factors.
There is a growing realisation internationally that climate change is
becoming a security issue in many parts of the world.6 Putting an
end to the debate over climate change, the UN Security Council in
a presidential statement declared at its meeting on climate change
on 20 July 2011 that possible adverse effects of climate change
may, in the long run, aggravate certain existing threats to international peace and security.
Water stress and climate induced conflicts and migration are some
of the big concerns associated with climate change. The effects of
increased climate change – most particularly water scarcity,
Major General ANM Muniruzzaman is President and CEO of the Bangladesh Institute of
Peace and Security Studies (BIPSS).
6
Militarising Climate Change (2011) ANM Muniruzzaman in an Interview with Isabel
Hilton, The Third Pole, July 4 2011.

87

increased natural disasters, food insecurity, loss of livelihood, displacement and migration, loss of marine biodiversity and fisheries
– will intensify exiting conflicts and, at the same time, draw new
lines of conflicts in South Asia like many regions in the world.
Effective climate change mitigation and adaption efforts, dialogue
and sharing of knowledge and technology and regional mechanisms can diminish climate induced consequences and thereby
lessen the likelihood of conflicts in the region.

Security ramifications and conflict potentials of climate change
The security implications of climate change cover a wide spectrum.
The recent scientific assessment presents a worrisome picture.
According to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 11 of the past 12 years
(1995–2006) rank among the 12 warmest years since 1850.7
The 2007 IPCC report predicts temperature rise of 1.1–6.4 °C by
2100. The number of natural disasters in the world may double
during the next 10 to 15 years. Over the past 10 years, 3,852 disasters killed more than 780,000 people, affected more than two
billion others and cost a minimum of US$960 billion.8 Major vulnerabilities induced from climatic hazards include human
displacement, freshwater shortages, reduced agricultural productivity and food insecurity, loss of livelihood, health hazards, energy
crisis, and disaster security.
Climate change worsens water quality and availability in regions
with water scarcity. Currently, 1.1 billion people are without access
to safe drinking water. More than 3.5 million people die each year
from water-related disease; 84% of them are children. Nearly all
deaths (98%) are in the developing world.9 This crisis may in turn
fuel existing internal or inter-state conflicts and social conflict and
7

8

9

IPCC (2007) Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution
of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change; Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Muniruzzaman, A.N.M. (2011) Climate change: Threat to international peace and security; in: The Daily Star, 11 August 2011.
Ibid.

88

it is feared that unresolved water issues could trigger Indo-Pak conflict, which would have unpredictable consequences internationally.
Reduced agricultural productivity and the resultant situation of
food insecurity is potentially the most worrying consequence of
climate change. If global warming rises to 3°C it is likely that the
number of people suffering from hunger will increase by 250 million to 550 million. According to the German Advisory Council on
Global Change, agricultural production from rain-fed agriculture
could fall by about 50% in some regions by 2020.10 Rising food
prices could potentially push hundreds of millions of people back
into poverty. This situation can undermine the economic performance of weak and unstable states, thereby aggravating destabilisation, the collapse of social systems and violent conflicts.
A changing climate affects the essential ingredients of maintaining
good health: clean air and water, sufficient food and adequate shelter. Every year, the health of 235 million people is likely to be seriously affected by gradual environmental degradation due to climate
change. Climate change is projected to cause over 150,000 deaths
annually and almost 45 million people are estimated to be malnourished because of it.11 Direct economic losses and human
casualties of global disasters have increased in recent decades, with
particularly large increases since the 1980s. According to Oxfam,
developing countries will require at least US$50 billion annually to
adapt to unavoidable climate change-related disasters.12
The impacts of climate change may damage key energy infrastructures, such as energy plants, energy routes, nuclear installations,
and consequently destabilise public order. For instance, the recent
earthquake in Japan caused an explosion in the Fukushima nuclear
plant, causing human casualties and disruption to energy produc10

Miljkovic, A. (2009) Environmental Impacts on Human Security and the Potential of Conflict, Waterwiki.Net.
11
Global Humanitarian Forum (2009) The Anatomy of a Silent Crisis, Human Impact
Report on Climate Change, Geneva.
12
Oxfam (2007) From Weather Alert to Climate Alarm, Oxfam Briefing Paper 108, November.

89

tion. The decline in hydroelectric power generation may additionally reinforce competition and conflicts over fossil energy sources.
Climate change could potentially trigger large-scale displacement
and migration from one region to another. The 2001 World Disasters Report estimated that there were currently 25 million ‘environmental refugees’.13 The IPCC estimates that by 2050, 150 million people could become displaced by sea-level rise (SLR), desertification, increasing water scarcity, floods and storms, etc.
Climate change also has security dimensions. Climate-induced
insecurities can trigger interstate tensions and conflicts. States may
be stressed to the point of collapse. The potential for regional conflicts due to climate-induced condition will be extremely high.
Radicalisation and terrorism may increase in many developing
societies, particularly in South Asia, due to the climate-induced
social and economic deprivation. When a government can no
longer deliver services to its people, conditions are ripe for extremists and terrorists to fill the vacuum. Resource scarcity could be a
contributing factor to conflict and instability. The 1994 genocide
in Rwanda was in many ways a consequence of squabbles over
agricultural resources. The 1974 Nigerian coup resulted largely
from an insufficient response to famine. The situation in Darfur,
which had land resources at its root, is spilling over into
neighbouring Chad. The United Nations estimates 300 potential
conflicts over water exist around the world today.14

Water stress and regional security implications in South Asia
The South Asian region is also highly sensitive to the consequences of climate change. It is known to be the most disaster
prone region in the world supporting a huge population of more
than 1.58 billion.15 Major regional security implications induced
from water stress include decreased water availability and water
quality in many arid and semiarid regions, an increased risk of
13

IFRC (2001) World Disasters Report 2001: Focus on Recovery; International Federation
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Society, Geneva.
14
Muniruzzaman, A.N.M. (2011), op cit.
15
2010 estimate, according to the World Bank Report released in 201.

90

floods and droughts in many regions, reduction in water regulation
in mountain habitats, increased incidence of waterborne diseases
such as malaria, dengue, and cholera, decreased agricultural productivity, adverse impacts on fisheries, adverse effects on many
ecological systems, decreased reliability of hydropower and biomass production, and, importantly, increased damages and deaths
caused by water-related extreme weather events.
In South Asia, climate change increases the variability of water
supply, leading to floods during some parts of the year and
droughts in others. Increasing water shortages relative to population growth are putting the Indus Basin irrigation and drainage
system in danger of collapse. 120 million to 1.2 billion will experience increased water stress by the 2020s in South and South-East
Asia.16 Water availability on per capita cubic metre basis in the
Himalayan River Basins is likely to decline from 7320 to 5700 in
case of Bangladesh in 2030, from 8500 to 5500 in case of Nepal,
and from 1730 to 1240 in the case of India.17 The report assessed
implications of the likely decline 275 Billion Cubic Meters (BCM)
renewable fresh water in India, Nepal, Bangladesh and China by
2030 for food security, health, migration, bio-diversity, social
stability and interstate relations in the region.

Melting of Himalayan Glaciers and Impacts on Indus River Basin
The Himalayan range contains high altitude glaciers that supply
water to many rivers in Asia. These rivers provide water to more
than half of the world’s population. Many people in Asia are
dependent on glacial melt water during dry season. Accelerated
glacial melt questions the very perennial nature of many of the
Himalayan flowing rivers. This is likely to have huge implications
on those dependent on the resource affecting water availability for

16
17

IPCC (2007), op cit.
Strategic Foresight Group (2010) The Himalayan Challenge Water Security in Emerging
Asia.

91

agricultural purposes.18 In Northwest China, 27% of the glacier
area will decline by 2050 (equivalent to an ice volume of 16,184
km3), as will 10 to 15% of the frozen soil area.19 The current
trends of glacial melt suggest that the Ganges, Indus, Brahmaputra
and other rivers across the northern Indian plains could likely
become seasonal rivers in the near future.20 This poses a challenge
for reducing the vulnerability of more than 1.3 billion people living
in the major river basins downstream from the Hindu KushHimalayan region. The rapid retreat of the Himalayan glaciers has
consequences for water-related hazards, such as glacier lake outburst floods, and for water stress, as a result of the decline in fresh
water supplies during the lean season.21 The conflict potential emanating from the melting of Himalayan glaciers underlies the factors leading to cross-border water-related conflicts such as per capita water availability, the level of water withdrawals for annual use
in relation to its availability, and the extent of dependence on water
resources that flow in from the borders.

Water stress as a driver of food insecurity
Reduced agricultural productivity, due to decreasing water availability and water-related natural catastrophes, is one of most worrisome consequences of water stress in South Asia. In the next 20
years, China, Nepal, India and Bangladesh in the Himalayan subregion will face the depletion of almost 275 billion cubic metres
(BCM) of annual renewable water.22 The agricultural sector will
continue to be the major consumer of water in China, Nepal, India
18

UNDP (2008) South Asian Regional Study on Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation:
Implications
for
Human
Development,
Human
Development
Report
2007/2008:Fighting climate change: Human solidarity in a divided world.
19
Singh, C.P. (2008) Alpine Ecosystem in Relation to Climate Change; in: ISG Newsletter,
no. 14, pp 1–4.
20
Eriksson, M. et al. (2009) The Changing Himalayas, Impact of climate change on water
resources and livelihoods in the greater Himalayas; International Centre for Integrated
Mountain Development (ICIMOD): Kathmandu.
21
Ives, J.D., R.B. Shrestha and P.K. Mool (2010) Formation of Glacial Lakes in the Hindu
Kush-Himalayas and GLOF Risk Assessment. International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD), Kathmandu.
22
Strategic Foresight Group (2010) The Himalayan Challenge Water Security in Emerging
Asia, op cit.

92

and Bangladesh; although the industrial and domestic sectors will
also need more water in the future. The crop yield will drop by 30–
50% in the case of all the four countries by the middle of the century. In India, agriculture accounts for almost 90% of the water
usage but this will decline to 70–75% by 2050. Nepal and Bangladesh presently use more than 95% of their water for agriculture
and will continue to do so until 2030. According to the Ministry of
Agriculture and Cooperatives, Nepal will have a food deficit of
more than 316,465 tonnes in 2010, owing to the unfavorable
monsoon. With changing weather patterns, erratic monsoons and
rising temperatures, the 'too much water, too little water' syndrome is likely to continue in Nepal.

River management and impending violent hydro-conflict
Water flow ignores political and community boundaries; decisions
in one place affect water use elsewhere. In the case of shared river
basins, water use upstream can affect downstream quality and
quantity, thus creating the potential for conflicts of interest.23
Water-related issues have led to interstate tensions and significantly hampered development, such as along the Nile, Euphrates,
Indus and Ganges rivers. In South Asia, the potential hydro-conflict is more severe than many parts of the world. India is hurtling
water by building expensive hydroelectric dams in a remote valleys
of India-controlled Kashmir.24 Being a rapidly growing but powerstarved economy, India plans to build many more dams over the
next decade. There are concerns over the Indus Waters Treaty that
was concluded in 1960 that sets out the legal framework for the
sharing of the waters of six rivers: Indus, Chenab, Jhelum, Sutlej,
Beas, and Ravi (flowing through northern India into Pakistan). But
the concern is growing in Pakistan that India is controlling the

23

Delli Priscoli, J. (year?) Case Study of River Basin Organizations. Institute for Water and
Watersheds.
24
Polgreen, L. and S. Tavernise (2010) Water Dispute Increases India-Pakistan Tension,
The New York Times.

93

water flow of the Indus, Chenab and Jhelum rivers that pass
through the India-administered state of Jammu and Kashmir.25
Since the Indus River provides water to over 80 percent of Pakistan’s 54 million acres of irrigated land, dam and water withdrawal
by India will cause desertification and would have devastating
impact on Pakistan agricultural productivity leading to wide-scale
food insecurity in Pakistan.
Water withdrawal and dam construction by India is the potential
source of bilateral tension and conflict. Pakistan fears that India
could make the country solely dependent on India in terms of war
and could create draught or famine during the crucial time like
war. The level of securitization went to the stage of nuclear ‘red
line’ with a warning from Pakistan. Afghanistan plans to build 12
dams on the Kabul River with a combined storage capacity of 4.7
million acre-feet, which Pakistan frets will further diminish the
Indus water supply.26
There is also huge potential for conflicts between Bangladesh and
India over water sharing of common rivers. Bangladesh shares 54
rivers with India, but it has agreement for only one river. From
1974, India started unilateral diversions of water from the Ganges
River after the construction of the Baraka Barrage. The Ganges
Water Treaty, which was signed in 1996 for a period of 30 years,
is also being fully implemented because of Indian unilateral withdrawal. India is violating the clauses of the Treaty by supplying
more during the wet season causing flooding, and supplying less
in the dry season resulting in draughts. Major impacts of this
withdrawal include saltwater intrusion, vegetation damage, erosion, reduced conveyance capacity and disrupted fishing. In addition, the construction of the Tipai Mukh Dam, disagreements over
the water sharing agreement for the Teesta River, and India’s plan
to start a country-wide river linking project will significantly
25

Wellen, R. (2011) Will Pakistan Counter India’s “Water Bomb” With a Nuclear Bomb?
Foreign Policy in Focus.
26
Daly, J. (2011) Pakistani Editorial Says Nuclear War with India “Inevitable” as Water Dispute Continues; in: The Journal of Turkish Weekly.

94

increase tension between the two countries that could be extended
to the stage of military conflicts in the near future.

Implications of water stress in Bangladesh
Bangladesh is predicted to be one of the worst victims of climateinduced insecurities. The IPCC statistics shows that rising sea
levels will wipe out more cultivable land in Bangladesh than anywhere in the world. By 2050, rice production is expected to drop
10 percent and wheat production by 30 percent. About 20 to 30
million people in Bangladesh alone could be on the move by 2050
because of climate change, causing the worst migration in human
history.27
Flood is the most frequent and most intense natural disaster in
Bangladesh. Every year flooding due to heavy rain thousands people suffer from loss of shelter, property and also agricultural products. Miller stated that high projected rise in sea level of about 88
cm (35 inches) would flood agricultural lowlands and deltas in
parts of Bangladesh.28 Sea-level rise will increase flood frequency
and flooding duration, affecting Aman production.29 A flood,
which ravaged the southwestern part of Bangladesh in 2000
caused damage or losses of at least US$500 million to crops, fish
farms, property and infrastructure. The shrimp sector was the
most affected sector, losing shrimp fields of equivalent US$230
million.
The main impacts of sea-level rise on water resources in Bangladesh are fresh water availability reduction by salinity intrusion.
Both water and soil salinity along the coast will be increased with
the rise in sea level, destroying normal characteristics of coastal soil
and water. A water salinity map for the period of 1967 and 1997
produced by the Soil Resources Development Institute shows that
27

UnB Dhaka (2009) Climate Change Impacts: 1.5cr people to be displaced in Bangladesh
by 2050; in: The Daily Star.
28
Miller, G.T. (2004) Living in the Environment; Brooks/Cole-Thomson Learning, USA.
29
Sarwar, G.M. (2005) Impacts of Sea Level Rise on the Coastal Zone of Bangladesh; Masters thesis, Lund University, Sweden.

95

the problem is already on the way.30 Soil of Jessore, Magura,
Narail, Faridpur, Gopalgonj and Jhalokati was newly salinized in
24 years of time expansion. A one metre sea-level rise will expand
the soil and water salinity area at a faster rate.
Reduced agricultural productivity and the resultant situation of
food insecurity is another threat to Bangladesh. In Bangladesh, sealevel rise and salinity intrusion decrease agricultural production by
unavailability of freshwater and soil degradation.31 For example,
loss of rice production in a coastal village of Satkhira district rice
production in 2003 was 1,151 metric tons less than the year
1985, corresponding to a loss of 69 percent.32
Another worrisome consequence of climate-induced natural disasters is the spread of water borne diseases in the coastal areas of
Bangladesh. Almost one in five people in Bangladesh still lack
improved water resources making them susceptible to water borne
diseases like anaemia, arsenicosis, cholera, diarrhoea, hepatitis,
malaria, schistosomes, typhoid and so on. With the increased density and distribution of salinity, cholera germs are getting favorable
habitat and spreading in the coastal area. Most major epidemics
that have occurred during the last 50 years have originated in
coastal regions. Besides, arsenic contamination in the groundwater
of Bangladesh is another crucial concern for the country. The
World Health Organization (WHO) described the arsenic contamination in Bangladesh as ‘the largest mass poisoning of a population in history’. Half of Bangladeshis, up to 77 million people,
have been exposed to the toxic arsenic.33

30

SRDI (1998) Coastal area and water salinity map of Bangladesh (1967 and 1997); Soil
Resources Development Institute (SRDI), Dhaka.
31
Rashid, M.M, A.K.F. Hoque and M.S. Iftekhar (2004) Salt Tolerances of Some Multipurpose Tree Species as Determined by Seed Germination; in: Journal of Biological Sciences, vol
4 (3), pp 288–292.
32
Ali, A. (2000) Vulnerability of Bangladesh Coastal Region to Climate Change with Adaptation Option. Bangladesh Space Research and Remote Sensing Organization (SPARRSO);
Dhaka.
33
Argos, M. et al. (2010) Arsenic exposure from drinking water, and all-cause and chronicdisease mortalities in Bangladesh (HEALS): a prospective cohort study; in: The Lancet, vol
376, no 9737, pp 252–258.

96

Bangladesh is most vulnerable to several water-related natural disasters and every year natural calamities upset people's lives in
some part of the country. The major disasters concerned here are
the occurrences of floods, cyclones and storm surges, flash floods,
droughts and riverbank erosion. Although this country has a monsoon climate and has enough rain, droughts frequently take a significant portion out of the agricultural economy of Bangladesh, and
cause hunger, instability, and insecurity.34 For instance, between
1991 and 2000, 93 major disasters were recorded in Bangladesh,
resulting in nearly 200,000 deaths and causing US$5.9 billion in
damages with high losses in agriculture and infrastructure.35

Climate-induced migration in South Asia
Climate change is likely to bring about significant changes in
migration patterns throughout the developing world. Increases in
the frequency and severity of chronic environmental hazards and
sudden onset disasters are projected to alter the typical migration
patterns of communities and entire countries.36 Climate change
may significantly affect human migration in three different ways:
first, warming of the atmosphere in some regions will reduce the
agricultural potential and undermine the ecosystem services such
as fertile soil and water affecting people’s livelihoods; second,
increasing extreme weather events will generate mass displacement; and third, sea-level rise will destroy the low-lying coastal
areas and millions of people who will have to relocate permanently.37 For example, Cyclone Nargis that struck Myanmar in May
2008 severely affected 2.4 million people and led to the displacement of 800,000 people. Desertification affecting Mexico’s dry-

34

UNEP (2001) Bangladesh: the State of the Environment 2001 Report.
According to the statistics of the Ministry of Environment and Forest, Bangladesh, as part
of the Strategic Program for Climate Resistance.
36
Raleigh, C., L. Jordan and I. Salehyan (2008) Assessing the Impact of Climate Change on
Migration and Conflict. Paper presented at ‘Social Dimensions of Climate Change’, Social
Development Department, the World Bank, Washington DC, 5–6 March 2008.
37
Panda, A. (2011) Climate Induced Migration from Bangladesh to India: Issues and Challenges. United Nations University, Institute of Environment and Human Security.
35

97

land regions results in the annual migration of 600,000 to
700,000 people from these areas.38
Climate change-induced migration is going to be in acute condition in South Asia. One third of the population live under the
poverty line and climate-induced vulnerabilities may cause largescale impoverishment, loss of livelihood, shelter and food availability. Major disasters – floods, earthquakes or cyclones – may induce
massive transboundaty migration. One of the riskiest places to live
is in low-elevation coastal zones. Worldwide, the largest populations living on low-lying coasts are in the Asia-Pacific region, in
countries like China, India, Bangladesh, Vietnam, Indonesia and
the Philippines. The delta has 8.5 million hectares of agricultural
lands, of which 486,000 hectares would be inundated by a 2
metre sea-level rise leading to large-scale internal and transboundary migration. Glacier melting could profoundly induce migration
by affecting the livelihoods of people who are directly dependent on
irrigated water, small-scale fishing and aquaculture. Mass migration due to climate change may have negative consequences
including escalating humanitarian crisis, rapid urbanization and
associated slum growth and stalled development.

Climate-induced migration in Bangladesh: the worst case
Climate change-induced hardships will cause large-scale displacement of a huge percentage of the population in Bangladesh.
Changes in local and regional climatic conditions in the form of
sea-level rise, heat stress, desertification, flooding and drought may
severely restrict livelihood options for large groups in Bangladesh,
and consequently cause climate-induced migration both domestically and across its borders. Most of the poor people do not own
land. The potential impact of a destructive flood in Bangladesh
would send hundreds of thousands of refugees streaming into

38

Brown, O. (2007) Climate Change and Forced Migration: Observations, Projections and
Implications, Background paper for the 2007 Human Development Report.

98

neighboring India, sparking religious conflicts, the spread of contagious diseases and vast damages to infrastructure.39
Climate change has already created a refugee situation in Bangladesh. We are seeing a trickle of internal migration within the country. According to several authors, between 64,000 and 1 million
Bangladeshis are rendered homeless every year due to riverbank
erosion alone. Myers (2002) argues that climate refugees from
Bangladesh alone might outnumber all current refugees worldwide. He projected that 26 million refugees will come from Bangladesh.40 When sea-level rise takes away about 20% of Bangladesh's land mass, then we will see a major refugee population
created by climate conditions. The country is so small but densely
populated that it will not be able to absorb these refugees. There
will be a spill over migration, or an exodus of people walking
towards India.

Conclusion and policy recommendation
Climate change-induced implications are looking more and more
unpredictable causing more frequent and intense natural disasters
and creating new lines of vulnerabilities and conflicts in the developing countries like Bangladesh. At this juncture, it is crucially
important to recognise that climate change is pervasive and has
more security implications than any other threat today. Climateinduced challenges should be placed at the core of security considerations in a rapidly changing world. Hence, effective international
cooperation, as advanced by the UN Security Council, should be
formed to address the unpredictable security consequences of climate change.
Mitigation and adaptation responses must go hand in hand. Just
because we are adapting does not mean we can stop mitigation
efforts. But in some areas of the world, for example in Bangladesh,
39

Broder, J.M. (2009) Climate Change Seen as Threat to U.S. Security. The New York
Times.
40
Myers, N. (2002) Environmental refugees: A growing phenomenon of the 21st century;
in: Philosophical Transactions: Biological Sciences, vol. 357 (1420), pp 609–613.

99

we are beyond mitigation because the negative impacts of climate
change are already being felt and will become more severe in the
coming years. We must start building our capacity to respond
immediately. The symptoms of climate change are very clear, so we
must prepare for the worst. The governments should initiate capacity-building of the states, military and the coastal communities
along with adopting national and regional policy frameworks,
building public awareness, and sharing and exchange of knowledge, information, technology and expertise. Strengthening and
enacting legal regimes and increasing the role of international
organizations should be prioritized. Above all, political will and
cooperation at policy level must be in the frontline to fight against
climate change driven social and political ramifications in the foreseeable future.

100

Environment, climate change and
human displacement
From literature, through empirical evidence
to policy-making
Tamer Afifi

1

Introduction

This paper gives a brief overview of the literature on environment,
climate change and human displacement and the various definitions of ‘environmental migration’. Moreover, it summarizes the
general outcomes of the project, ‘Environmental Changes, Forced
Migration Scenarios (EACH-FOR)’. Finally, the paper sheds some
light on the consideration of ‘environmental migrants’ in the negotiation text of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), Conferences of Parties (COPs) and
related climate talks that might have a significant influence on
global, regional and national policy-making with regard to human
displacement caused by environment and climate change.

2

Literature overview: predicted number of ‘environmental
migrants’

The literature provides numerous estimates of the number of people who might have been - or might be - displaced due to environmental and climate change throughout the upcoming decades. The
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
(IFRC) estimates the number of ‘environmental refugees’ to be
exceeding the number of people who have been displaced by war
Tamer Afifi is Associate Academic Officer at the United Nations University Institute for Environment and Human Security, Bonn, Germany.

101

(IFRC, 2003). According to the Office of the High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), 24 million people around the world have
fled due to floods, famine and other environmental factors
(UNHCR, 2002). Four years back, Klaus Toepfer from the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) expected that by the end
of 2010, the number of ‘environmental migrants’ would reach 50
million (Boano et al., 2008). At the beginning of 2011, this statement created great discussion among academics and media specialists, who questioned this estimate and the empirical proof of
the statement.
The Almeria Statement (1994) suggested that 135 million people
may be negatively affected by desertification and droughts, while
Robert Nicholls (2004) expects the number of ‘environmental
migrants’ to reach 200 million by the year 2080. The Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change (IPCC) predicted in 2007
that the number of ‘environmental migrants’ would reach 150
million by 2050, and in the same year, the Friends of Earth anticipated a higher number, namely 200 million. Also in the same
year, Christian Aid broke down its expected 0.9 billion ‘environmental migrants’ by 2010 into two categories: 250 million people
affected by drought, floods and hurricanes; and 645 million people
affected by development projects, such as dam construction.
Many of the estimates were criticized (Black et al., 2008), since
they are rather speculative and based on different indicators,
depending on the researchers and institutions that produce them.
Therefore, the figures could make the policy-makers doubt the
credibility of these estimates as, although they may all be credible,
they vary across the different studies and do not all use the same
definition/classification for environmentally displaced people, as
will be elaborated in the next section.

3

Definitions of environmental migration

Since the issue of climate change and environmental human displacement arose, numerous publications introduced various terms

102

and definitions for environmental migrants; one of the earliest
definitions being by the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP) in 1985 that defines environmental refugees as "those
people who have been forced to leave their traditional habitat, temporarily or permanently, because of a marked environmental disruption (...) . that jeopardised their existence and/or seriously
affected the quality of their life (...)" (El-Hinnawi, 1985).
An extended definition followed 22 years later by the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) that states the following:
“Environmental migrants are persons or groups of persons who, for
compelling reasons of sudden or progressive change in the environment that adversely affects their lives or living conditions, are
obliged to leave their habitual homes, or choose to do so, either
temporarily or permanently, and who move either within their
country or abroad” (IOM, 2007).
This definition is more comprehensive as compared to El-Hinnawi’s; firstly, it adds the time dimension to the environmental
problems that might lead to human displacement by distinguishing between the sudden (such as floods and earthquakes) and slow
onset (such as sea-level rise or desertification) disasters/phenomena by not limiting migration to permanent but also
including temporal migration. Secondly, it is not limited to international human displacement but also includes the possibility of
people being displaced within the borders of one country. This
issue is essential when it comes to displacement/migration
induced by climate change or environmental problems, since most
of the people who rely on environmental services in their daily lives
are farmers, cattle herders, fishermen and pastoralists who in fact
find it very difficult to leave their homes, due to various financial,
historical and cultural reasons. However, one cannot overlook
them, just because they do not cross the borders and leave for
another country.

103

A definition tree introduced by Renaud et al. (2011) does not give
a unique explanation of environmentally displaced persons but
classifies them into the following groups:
– Environmental emergency migrants (those fleeing the worst of
an environmental impact, either permanently or temporarily,
usually in the case of rapid onset hazards, such as earthquakes,
floods and tsunamis). In such cases, it is hard to incorporate
economic factors, since migrants belonging to this category leave
immediately to survive a potentially fatal event.
– Environmentally forced migrants (those who must leave to avoid
the worst of environmental deterioration, usually in the case of
slow onset hazards, including water and land degradation). In
these cases, economic factors could be incorporated, since
migrants in this category have the opportunity to consider that
their economic situation would deteriorate due to environmental
degradation.
– Environmentally motivated migrants (those who may leave a
progressively worsening environment as a means of pre-empting
the most severe impacts, usually in the case of a progressive loss
of ecosystem services, including rising sea levels and desertification). In these instances, economic factors could also be incorporated, since migrants in this category have given thought to their
future economic situation and are attempting to create a new
economic scenario for their future elsewhere.
These are only examples of the numerous definitions and terms
related to the topic. In order to find out more about the phenomena
itself, various projects have been conducted, mainly to answer the
following question: To what extent does environmental and climate
change affect human displacement? The question is very simplistic, as there are always other economic, political, social, demographic and cultural factors that contribute to the decision/action
of human displacement and it is very hard to extract the environmental and climatic factors from this interrelation.
In general, there are three ways to look upon environmental
human displacement/migration (figures 1, 2, 3). There is environmental migration (figure 1), where the environment/climate

104

does not have a direct impact on the displacement, and where the
mechanism through which environment influences the displacement is economic.

Environmental factors
(drought, desertification,
etc.)

Economic factors (poverty,
unemployment, etc.)

HUMAN
DISPLACEMENT

Figure 1: Horizontal environmental human displacement.

Figure 1 shows the horizontal environmental migration, where the
root cause is environmental degradation/climate change, leading to
economic problems (poverty, unemployment, etc.), leading in turn
to displacement/migration. In this case, the environmental/climatic factor is masked by the economic factors, and it is
usually slow onset environmental factors, such as drought and
desertification.
In vertical environmental migration there are many factors, including the environment, that have a direct impact on the migration
decision/human displacement, as shown in figure 2.
Figure 2 shows that all the combined factors have a direct impact
on human displacement. For example, when landslides occur,
people’s livelihoods decrease enormously. If there are no other
alternatives, such as working on other lands in the neighborhood
or occupying alternative jobs, then people are likely to leave the
village/region. There could be other social, political and demographic factors that intervene and that encourage people to leave as
well. There could be cases where there is an overlap between horizontal and vertical environmental human displacement.

105

Environmental factors
(landslides, etc.)
Economic factors (no other
livelihood/income
alternatives)

Demographic factors (rapid
population growth versus
limited resources)

Social factors (no good
schooling for children)

Political factors (ethnical
discrimination)

H
U
M
A
N

D
I
S
P
L
A
C
E
M
E
N
T

Figure 2: Vertical environmental human displacement.

The third type of environmental human displacement is one-onone migration, where there is no other option for the people than
to be displaced, such as the occurrence of floods, earthquakes and
tsunamis. In this case, people’s lives - and not only livelihoods -are
threatened by a particular natural disaster. This is illustrated in
figure 3.

Environmental factors (natural
disasters, such as floods,
earthquakes, tsunamis, etc.)

HUMAN DISPLACEMENT

Figure 3: One-on-one environmental human displacement.

In one-on-one environmental human displacement we only have
two variables that are directly connected to each other. The
dependent variable is the human displacement and the independ-

106

ent variable is any sudden onset disaster that makes people move
on the spot.

4

Evidence from the field: outcomes of EACH-FOR Research Project

This section summarizes the general outcomes of the Environmental Change and Forced Migration Scenarios (EACH-FOR)
Research Project that was financed by the European Commission
in the Sixth Framework Programme (EC FP6) from 2007 to
2009.
Spain

Russia

Kazakhstan

The Balkans

Kyrgyzstan
Tajikistan

Dominican
Republic, Haiti

Morocco
Western
Sahara

China

Niger

Mexico

Vietnam
Turkey

Senegal

Bangladesh
Ghana
Ecuador
Mozambique
Egypt
Argentina

Tuvalu

Figure 4: The geographical coverage of the EACH-FOR Research Project.

As can be seen from figure 4, the EACH-FOR Research Project
covered 22 case studies worldwide. A main research objective of
the project was to explore and describe the causes of forced migration in relation to environmental change. The methodology was
based on expert interviews and questionnaires. The latter were
divided into two categories: migrant and non-migrant questionnaires. Migrant questionnaires were conducted in order to better
understand whether the environmental factors contributed to the

107

migration decision of the respondents and, if yes, to what extent.
Non-migrant questionnaires mainly covered the broad question:
What makes people resist the environmental problems and insist
to stay in their villages/homes/countries?
In the framework of the project, a global econometric gravity model
was applied by Afifi and Warner (2008), which comprised the
pairwise assessment of the impact of 13 environmental independent variables worldwide on human migration stocks across countries. In order to account for other factors that might interfere in
the relationship between the environmental factors and migration,
additional independent variables were added to the model. The latter reflected cultural, religious, demographic, economic and geographic factors, such as the distances between the various countries. The results showed that there is a significant impact of environmental factors on migration stocks, bearing in mind the limitations in the model (Afifi and Warner, 2008).
The most important findings of the EACH-FOR Research Project
were the following (Jäger, 2009):
• There are other potential environmental triggers for human displacement than climate change; the problems – including environmental ones – faced by migrants, potential migrants and
non-migrants are very complex and very often interrelated.
• Due to global warming, the magnitude and frequency of various
potential environmental problems lead to further environmental
degradation, which in turn increases the probability of human
displacement.
• Although migration has always been a coping mechanism in
many societies and communities, the migration patterns have
changed in past decades. For example, in Niger, one of the
EACH-FOR case studies, what used to be internal migration is
becoming international and what used to be seasonal migration
is becoming permanent (Afifi, 2011a).
• Migration very often occurs only when the livelihood can no
longer be sustained due to severe environmental problems

108

affecting the harvest for farmers or the animals for cattle herders.
• The financial means play an important role in the migration
decision. The will to leave is not always sufficient.
• Ownership of the land plays an important in taking the decision
to migrate or to stay. People who do not own land are more likely
to be mobile and leave for better livelihoods. The case of Egypt
represents a very good example for that (Afifi, 2011b).

5

Environmental human displacement in the context of policymaking and Conferences of the Parties

The Conferences of the Parties (COPs) of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) bring
together policy-makers, academics, NGOs, International Organizations and journalists. Therefore, including an agreed-upon paragraph on human displacement/migration in the climate negotiations text is very important for pushing further the process of considering environmentally displaced persons in the agendas of policy-makers worldwide.
COP-13 (Bali, 2007) laid out the elements of adaptation which
might be considered in an international climate agreement (Warner, 2011). In COP-14 (Poznan, 2008), the word ‘migration’ was
mentioned for the first time in the assembly document. This was
greatly supported by applied research and the humanitarian community. In COP-15 (Copenhagen, 2009), a broader adaptation
framework including ‘migration and displacement’ was adopted
and paragraph 4 f was added to the negotiation text:
Measures to enhance understanding, coordination and cooperation
related to national, regional and international climate change
induced displacement, migration and planned relocation, where
appropriate;
In June 2010, informal talks about loss and damage took place
and covered the potential consequences of both extreme events and

109

longer-term foreseeable impacts of climate change, which implicitly includes human displacement/migration.
In COP-16 (Cancun, 2010), there were no major changes in the
negotiation text regarding environmental human displacement.
Paragraph 14 f looked as follows:
Invites all Parties to enhance adaptation action under the Copenhagen Adaptation Framework [for Implementation] taking into
account their common but differentiated responsibilities and
respective capabilities, and specific national and regional development priorities, objectives and circumstances, [and whereby developing country Parties shall be supported by developed country Parties and in accordance with paragraph 6 below], to undertake,
inter alia:
(f) Measures to enhance understanding, coordination and cooperation related to national, regional and international climate change
induced displacement, migration and planned relocation, where
appropriate;

6

Summary and conclusion

As seen from the analysis above, environmental human displacement was not yet included in advocacy plans or policy-making
when researchers started addressing it in the mid 1980s. Although
there was a huge debate on whether to consider people who leave
their home due to environmental or climatic reasons as migrants,
and although various definitions were introduced with reference to
this category of people, this issue had remained in the domain of
research. However, after the Tsunami of December 2004 and
Hurricane Katrina in August 2005, more awareness was raised,
especially as the international community realized that environmental problems are not limited to developing countries and that
everyone is a potential environmentally induced displaced person.
Empirical research proves that people might be very attached to
their land and would rather prefer to stay home, especially people
110

who rely on environmental services in their daily life to make their
living. Nevertheless, environmental problems can be devastating to
the extent that these people have to move to other regions, provided
that they have the financial means for that. It is also important to
highlight that in most cases people move due to a bundle of complex reasons that might include the environmental problems that
face them in the areas of origin. The extent to which environmental
problems contribute to human displacement varies throughout the
different cases. In the most severe cases, such as tsunamis, earthquakes or floods, it can be the only reason why people leave.
Although there is no binding agreement in respect to environmental human displacement, including migration in the negotiation text is a big step forward, since it could serve as a basis for creating a consensus or agreement on protecting this category of people. For example, sooner or later, a solution will have to be found to
support the populations living on the islands suffering from sealevel rise and, therefore, including these populations in the political
agendas of the Parties of the UNFCCC prepares the international
community to various scenarios for the near future.

Bibliography
Afifi, T. (2011b) Stealth Environmental Influences on Economic
Migration in Egypt; in: Africa Initiative Discussion Papers, No.1 –
July 2011.
Afifi, T. (2011a) Economic or Environmental Migration? The Push
Factors in Niger; in: International Migration Journal, vol 49;
International Organization for Migration.
Afifi, T. and K. Warner (2008) The Impact of Environmental Degradation on Migration Flows across Countries; Working Paper
No.5/2008. UNU-EHS, Bonn.
Almeria Statement (1994) The Almeria Statement on Desertification and Migration. Statement following the International Symposium on Desertification and Migration, Almeria, February 8–
11.

111

Black, R., D. Kniveton, R. Skeldon, D. Coppard, A. Murata and K.
Schmidt-Verkerk (2008) Demographics and Climate Change:
Future Trends and their Policy Implications for Migration.
Working Paper T-27; Development Research Centre on Migration, Globalisation and Poverty, Brighton.
Boano, C., R. Zetter and T. Morris (2008) Environmentally Displaced People: Understanding Linkages between Environmental
Change,Livelihoods and Forced Migration; Refugee Studies Centre, Department of International Development, University of
Oxford, Oxford.
El-Hinnawi, E. (1985) Environmental Refugees; United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP), Nairobi.
IFRC (2003) World Disasters Report: Focus on Ethics in Aid; The
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, Geneva.
IOM (2007) Discussion Note: Migration and the Environment,
Background Paper MC/INF/288; IOM, Geneva.
Jaeger, J. (2009) Synthesis Report of the Environmental Change
and Forced Migration Scenarios (EACH-FOR) Project; European
Commission, Sixth Framework Programme (FP6), Brussels.
Nicholls, R. J. (2004) Coastal Flooding and Wetland Loss in the
21st Century: Changes under the SRES Climate and Socioeconomic Scenarios; in: Global Environmental Change: Human and
Policy Dimensions, vol 14 (1), pp 69–86.
Renaud, F.G., O. Dun, K. Warner and J. Bogardi (2011) A decision
framework for environmentally induced migration; in: International Migration, vol 49 (S1), pp e5–e29.
UNHCR (2002) A critical time for the environment; in: Refugees
Magazine, no 127, p 2.
Warner, K. (2011) Climate Change Induced Displacement: Adaptation Policy in the Context of the UNFCCC Climate Negotiations;
Division of International Protection, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Geneva.

112

Letter to the Netherlands Chief
Negotiator UN Climate Talks
Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment
Marius Enthoven

113

114

