Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Himalayan Glaciers:
Climate Change, Water Resources,
and Water Security
Committee on Himalayan Glaciers, Hydrology,
Climate Change, and Implications for Water Security
Board on Atmospheric Studies and Climate
Division on Earth and Life Studies

THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
Washington, D.C.
www.nap.edu

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of
distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the
furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. Upon the authority
of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it
to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is
president of the National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It is
autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the National
Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. The National
Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs,
encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr.
Charles M. Vest is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to
secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy
matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts under the responsibility given to
the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal
government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and
education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to
associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy’s purposes of
furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning in accordance with
general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operating
agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in
providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering
communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of
Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and vice chair, respectively,
of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

COMMITTEE ON HIMALAYAN GLACIERS, HYDROLOGY,
CLIMATE CHANGE, AND IMPLICATIONS FOR WATER SECURITY
HENRY J. VAUX, JR. (Chair), University of California, Berkeley
DEBORAH BALK, Baruch College of the City University of New York
EDWARD R. COOK, Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Palisades, NY
PETER GLEICK,* Pacific Institute for Studies in Development, Environment, and
Security, Oakland, CA
WILLIAM K.-M. LAU, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD
MARC LEVY, Columbia University, Palisades, NY
ELIZABETH L. MALONE, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Joint Global
Change Research Institute, College Park, MD
ROBERT MCDONALD, The Nature Conservancy, Arlington, VA
DREW SHINDELL, NASA Goddard Institute of Space Studies, New York, NY
LONNIE G. THOMPSON, The Ohio State University, Columbus
JAMES L. WESCOAT JR., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
MARK W. WILLIAMS, University of Colorado, Boulder
Consultant
RICHARD MATTHEW, University of California, Irvine
NRC Staff
MAGGIE WALSER, Study Director
LAURA J. HELSABECK, Senior Program Officer
MALAY MAJMUNDAR, Program Officer
SHELLY FREELAND, Senior Program Assistant

Asterisk (*) denotes member who resigned during the course of the study.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Preface
Many glaciers and snowpacks around the world are receding. The rates and
timing of glacial wasting, the volume of ice melt that causes a net loss of glacier volume,
vary and the causes are complex. In most instances there are multiple influences that
interact in complicated ways. In the early stages of glacial wasting streamflows increase
while in the later stages they may decline. Wherever glaciers are wasting continuously
there are concerns about the consequences for available water supplies.
The glaciers of the Hindu Kush-Himalayan (HKH) region are among the largest
and most spectacular in the world. Although there is some scientific knowledge and
information about the state of the glaciers of the HKH region, with implications for future
water supplies, there is also significant uncertainty. Concern has been heightened by
several highly visible pronouncements which upon examination proved to be highly
qualitative, local in scale, or to lack any credible scientific basis. This report, prepared by
a Committee appointed by the National Research Council, seeks to describe and analyze
the scientific knowledge about the glaciers of the region, their impact on regional
waterscape, and likely impacts of changes in the glaciers on the population of South Asia.
More specifically, the Committee addressed the following questions:





How sensitive are the Himalayan glaciers to climate and other environmental
factors?
What are the potential impacts of changes in climate and glaciers on the timing
and volume of river flows in the regions and what are the likely implications for
water supplies and extreme climatic events such as floods?
What water management systems are in place to help adapt to changes in regional
hydrologic systems and how might those systems be strengthened?
What are the main vulnerabilities of downstream populations to changes in water
supplies, what are the prospects for conflict and/or cooperation, and what are the
implications for national security?

The Committee addressed these questions from several perspectives: the physical
geography of the region, the human geography of the region, and the environmental
security of the region. The Committee also identifies additional scientific and data needs
as well as possible means of adapting to changes in water security, and draws a series of
conclusions.
To help inform its analyses the Committee hosted an interdisciplinary workshop
in the fall of 2011 in Washington, D.C. The two-day workshop included both invited
presentations and extended discussion to explore the many issues that bear on
streamflows, water supplies, and the problems of adaptation in the region. The agenda for
the workshop and a list of participants comprise Appendix A. The Committee expresses

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

its appreciation to all of the workshop participants for sharing their perspectives and
wisdom. The Committee would like to thank Richard Matthew, who assisted with
revisions to the report. The Committee is also grateful for the assistance of NRC staff
Lauren Brown and Daniel Muth who served as note takers at the workshop, and Keren
Charles and Zhen Liu who prepared data and graphics.
The Committee was especially fortunate in being supported by three different
units of the National Research Council, the Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate
(BASC); the Water Science and Technology Board (WSTB); and the Committee on
Population (CPOP). We are particularly grateful for the help and guidance of Program
Officers Maggie Walser of BASC, Laura Helsabeck of WSTB, and Malay Majmundar of
CPOP. These three ably kept the Committee on task and provided many of their own
valuable insights, which substantially improved the report. Shelly Freeland of BASC
provided all manner of administrative support, which helped to make the Committee’s
efforts both efficient and pleasant. Finally, the Committee would like to thank the
individuals responsible for the review of this report. Their comments were valuable and
strengthened the report significantly.
Henry J. Vaux, Jr., Chair
Committee on Himalayan Glaciers,
Hydrology, Climate Change,
and Implications for Water Security

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Acknowledgments
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse
perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the
National Research Council’s (NRC’s) Report Review Committee. The purpose of this
independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the
institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the
report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the
study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect
the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to thank the following individuals for
their review of this report:
Ana Barros, Duke University
Mahendra Bhutiyani, Snow and Avalanche Study Establishment, India
Bodo Bookhagen, University of California, Santa Barbara
Abbas Firoozabadi, Yale University
Stefan Hastenrath, University of Wisconsin, Madison
Arthur Lee, Chevron Corporation
David Michel, Stimson Center
John Pomeroy, University of Saskatchewan
V. Ramanathan, Scripps Institution of Oceanography
Alan Washburn, Naval Postgraduate School
Michael White, Brown University
Aaron Wolf, Oregon State University
Although the reviewers listed above have provided constructive comments and
suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the views of the committee, nor did they see
the final draft of the report before its release. The review of this report was overseen by
Dr. Gerald E. Galloway, University of Maryland, appointed by the Division on Earth and
Life Studies, and Dr. M. Granger Morgan, Carnegie Mellon University, appointed by the
Report Review Committee, who were responsible for making certain that an independent
examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and
that all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the final content
of this report rests entirely with the authoring panel and the institution.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Contents
SUMMARY…………………………………………………………………………………….….1
1

2

3

4

5

INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………….……..7
Study Context and Charge to the Committee, 10
Geographic Scope, 10
Study Approach and Methodology, 17
Organization of the Report, 18
PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY………………………………………..……………………19
Glacier Mass Balance, 19
Regional Climate and Meteorology, 30
Paleoclimate, 42
Regional Hydrology, 51
Physical Extreme Events, 59
Conclusions, 62
HUMAN GEOGRAPHY AND WATER RESOURCES……………………...……….65
Population Distribution and Migration, 65
Patterns of Water Use, 71
Clean Water and Sanitation Access, 86
Measuring Water Scarcity, 87
Water Management, Institutions, and Hydroclimatic Change, 92
Conclusions, 94
ENVIRONMENTAL RISK AND SECURITY…………………….…………………97
Natural Hazards and Vulnerability 97
Security Dynamics and Water Conflict, 112
Conclusions, 124
CONCLUSION………………….……………………………….…………………..…127
A Way Forward, 128
Research and Data Needs, 130
Options for Adapting to Changes in Climate, Hydrology, and Water Availability, 132

REFERENCES………………………………………………………………………...………..141
APPENDIXES
A
Workshop Agenda and Participants…...………………………………...…………….169
B
Summaries of Workshop Presentations...…………………………...…………………175
C
Glacier Measurement Methods...…………………………...…….……………………185
D
Disaster Agencies and Databases………………………………………………………189
E
Acronyms and Abbreviations………………………...………………………………...197
F
Institutional Oversight………………………………...………………………………..199
G
Biographical Sketches of Committee Members………………………...………...……203

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Summary
The Hindu Kush-Himalayan (HKH) region extends over 2,000 km from east to
west across the Asian continent spanning several countries: Afghanistan, Bangladesh,
Bhutan, China, India, Nepal, and Pakistan (Figure S.1). This region is the source of
numerous large Asian river systems, including the Indus, Ganges, and Brahmaputra,
which provide water for over a billion people. The surface water of these rivers and
associated groundwater constitute a significant strategic resource for all of Asia. Many of
the countries in this region are already experiencing physical water scarcity. Existing
water stress and projections of population growth have led to concern over possibilities of
negative impacts from changes in the availability of water supplies in the coming
decades.
Scientific evidence indicates that glaciers in the HKH region are retreating at rates
comparable to those in other parts of the world, and confirms that the rate has accelerated
in the past century. In this region, conventional wisdom is that glacial meltwater is an
important supplement to naturally occurring run-off from precipitation and snowmelt.
The watersheds of the area each exhibit complex hydrology and the magnitude of the
contribution of glacial meltwater to the total water supply in these rivers is not clear and
the implications of accelerated rates of glacial retreat and the resulting increase in glacial
wastage for downstream populations have not been precisely characterized. Important
questions about regional water security need to be addressed in the context of incomplete
science and unresolved uncertainties.
The eastern and western areas of the HKH region differ in climate, especially in
timing and type of precipitation, and in glacier behavior and dynamics as well. The Sutlej
Valley serves a rough dividing line, with precipitation in the eastern end of the region
dominated by monsoonal activity in summer while precipitation in the western end is
dominated by the mid-latitude westerlies in winter. There is evidence of glacier retreat in
the eastern and central Himalayas while glaciers in the western Himalayas appear to be
more stable, and may even be advancing. The HKH region is geographically vast and
complex both climatologically and hydrologically, and this complexity is dynamic and
possibly changing. This large spatial variability makes it very difficult to generalize
observations and findings over the entire region.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

2

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

FIGURE S.1 The Hindu-Kush Himalayan region extends over 2,000 km across South
Asia and includes all or parts of: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, India, Nepal,
and Pakistan. The region is the source of many of Asia’s major rivers, including the
Indus, Ganges, and Brahmaputra.
The HKH region’s climate is changing. Although generally temperatures are
increasing and these increases are likely to accelerate in coming decades, spatial
variability and gaps in observational data mean that it remains unclear what specific
manifestations of climate change will be in specific places – including where and how
quickly glaciers might retreat and what the cumulative impacts on the hydrologic system
of the region will be. Moreover, it is difficult to separate the effects of changes in glacial
wastage from other factors. These factors include changes in the timing and amounts of
monsoonal rain and seasonal snowmelt; snow and ice dynamics; the effects of aerosols
and black carbon1, and the role of tectonic activity in destabilizing glaciers. In addition,
water use changes resulting from changes in population numbers and densities,
livelihoods and consumption patterns, water management decisions including
groundwater pumping, agricultural water-use dynamics, and the extent of pollutants will
affect water availability in the region.
1

Black carbon refers to particulate matter derived from the incomplete combustion of a hydrocarbon.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Summary

3

Despite these important uncertainties, not everything is uncertain or unknown.
The National Research Council Committee on Himalayan Glaciers, Hydrology, Climate
Change, and Implications for Water Security was charged with addressing questions
about four aspects of water security in the region. The Committee’s overarching
conclusions are that while there remains substantial scientific uncertainty, snow and
glacial melt will likely continue to be important sources of water in the region and there
will be several climatic, glaciological, and hydrological factors that control the rate,
volume, and timing of snow and ice melt. The means of adapting to change will in large
measure be small-scale in nature and adaptive solutions will be essential. Effective
management institutions will also be critical and will need to operate flexibly. Monitoring
systems will be critical to implementing effective adaptation solutions and improving
water management systems. The following are more specific and detailed conclusions
that relate to the questions in the Committee’s charge (The full charge can be found in
Box 1.1 of the main text of the report).
How sensitive are the Himalayan glaciers to changes in temperature,
precipitation, and the surface energy budget?
The climate of the Himalayas is not uniform and is strongly influenced by the
South Asian monsoon in the east and the mid-latitude westerlies in the west. Evidence
suggests that the eastern Himalayas and the Tibetan Plateau are warming, and this trend
is more pronounced at higher elevations, however the long-term significance of this trend
is not clear. Absorbing aerosols such as desert dust and black carbon may contribute to
the rapid warming of the atmosphere, and model results indicate this may in turn
contribute to accelerated melting of snowpack and glacier retreat.
The rate of retreat and growth of individual glaciers is highly dependent on
glacier characteristics and location. In the eastern and central Himalayas there is evidence
of glacier retreat with rates accelerating over the past century. Retreat rates are
comparable to other areas of the world. Glaciers in the western Himalayas appear to be
more stable overall, with evidence that some may even be advancing.
What does current glaciological and climatological knowledge imply about
potential changes in climate on downstream flows? What are the likely major
impacts on water supplies and flood regimes?
Surface water flow is highly seasonal and varies across the region, as does the
relative importance of glacial meltwater. In most instances, the annual contribution of
snowmelt and rainfall to streamflow exceeds that of glacier wastage. The contribution of
glacial wastage can be more important when the glacial wastage acts as a buffer against
hydrologic impacts brought about by a changing climate. Overall, retreating glaciers over
the next several decades are unlikely to cause significant change in water availability at
lower elevations, which depend primarily on monsoon precipitation and snowmelt.
However, for high elevation areas, current rates of glacial retreat, if they continue, appear
to be sufficient to alter the seasonal and temporal streamflow in some basins.
Uncertainties in the role of groundwater in the overall hydrology of the region are
even greater than those of surface water. Evidence suggests that sizable and extensive
overdraft in the central Ganges Basin is likely to have an earlier and larger impact on
water supplies than foreseeable changes in glacial wastage. For upstream populations,

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

4

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

glacial lake outburst floods and landslide lake outburst floods are dominant physical
hazard risks. For downstream populations in the central and eastern Himalayas, floods
from changes in monsoon dynamics are more likely to be important, along with changes
in the timing of extreme events.
What management systems (including water supply, water demand, land use
and other institutions and infrastructure) are in place to manage climate-induced
changes in regional hydrology, and how might they be strengthened?
Water resources management and provision of clean water and sanitation is
already a challenge in the HKH region. The adequacy and effectiveness of existing water
management institutions is a reasonable, if coarse, indicator of how the region is likely to
cope with changes in water supply. Changes in seasonal streamflow could have
significant impacts on the local populations by altering water availability patterns and
affecting water management decisions and policies for irrigation, municipal, industrial,
and environmental use.
Current efforts that focus on natural hazards and disaster reduction in the region
can offer useful lessons when considering and addressing the potential for impacts
resulting from glacial retreat and changes in snowmelt processes in the region. Water
management assessments have advanced over the past 5 to 10 years, though their
implementation in water policies and programs is less clear; there is to date limited
penetration to lower levels of governance, or support for local water managers who are
most at risk. Changes to the hydrologic system are inevitable and adaptation is needed at
all levels of governance and throughout societies from rural household to city-level.
Adaptation approaches need to be flexible enough to change with changing conditions,
e.g., smaller scale and lower cost water management systems, because of uncertainty in
impacts and the dynamic nature of future changes.
What are some of the main vulnerabilities to adjusting to changes in water
supply in these downstream areas? What are the prospects for increased
competition, or improved cooperation, between different downstream water users?
What are some of the implications for national security in the region?
Rural and urban poor may be most at risk, in part because the poor are least likely
to be able to retrofit, move, or rebuild as needed, when faced with risks. Social changes in
the region have at least as much of an effect on water use as environmental factors do on
water supply, leading to stress. Among the most serious challenges, even in the absence
of climate change, are the magnitude of conflicting demands for limited water resources,
the lack of corresponding institutional capacity to cope with such conflicts, and the
current political disputes among regional actors that complicate reaching any agreements
on resource disputes. Although the history of international river disputes and agreement
in this region suggests that cooperation is a more likely outcome than violent conflict,
social conditions may have changed in ways that make historical patterns less informative
about current and future challenges; populations are larger, the number of state and nonstate actors has increased dramatically, patterns of economic growth have changed, and
the resource challenges are more complex. Changes in the availability of water resources
may play an increasing role in political tensions, especially if existing water management
institutions do not evolve to take better account of the social, economic, and ecological

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Summary

5

complexities in the region. Agreements will likely reflect existing political relations more
than optimal management strategies. The most dangerous situation to monitor for is a
combination of state fragility (encompassing, e.g., recent violent conflict, obstacles to
economic development, and weak management institutions) and high water stress.
A WAY FORWARD
When considering the link between humans and the environment within the
context of water security in the HKH region, four themes emerge: 1) there is significant
variability in the climate, hydrology, and glacier behavior as well as the demographics
and water use patterns within the region, 2) uncertainties exist and will continue to exist
in both the physical and social systems, 3) to reduce and respond to this uncertainty there
is a need for improved monitoring of both the physical and social systems; and 4) in the
face of this uncertainty, the most compelling need is to improve water management and
hazards mitigation systems.
Theme 1: There is significant variability in the climate, hydrology, and glacier
behavior as well as the demographics and water use patterns in the region. The retreat
rates of Himalayan glaciers vary over time and space, with the rate of retreat being higher
in the east than the west. There are confounding factors such as dust and black carbon
that could affect glacier melt and in some cases increase glacier wastage. Changes in the
monsoon will probably be more important than changes in glacier wastage at lower,
downstream elevations. Rates of urbanization vary across the region, as does the portion
of the population with access to improved water and sanitation.
Theme 2: Uncertainties exist and will continue to exist in both the physical and
social systems. The impact of future climate change is uncertain but will probably
accelerate rates of glacier retreat. Accelerated glacier retreat rates will have significant
impacts in local, high mountain areas but may not be important downstream unless the
seasonal contribution of glacier meltwater to rivers is high or dense populations are
dependent on historical flowrates. As the region’s population becomes more urbanized
and standards of living change, water use patterns will also change in ways that will be
difficult to predict. Existing demographic methods also do not allow for projections at a
sufficient spatial resolution to determine whether, for example, certain river basins and
elevation zones will experience higher rates of population growth than others and how
the demographic composition of those specific areas will change. In both the physical and
social systems, stationarity – the assumption that the systems will fluctuate within a
known range of variability – will no longer apply. In other words, the past is not a good
basis for prediction, and past trends in the climate, hydrology, glacier behavior,
population, and water use of the region will not be a viable guide for the future.
Theme 3: To reduce and respond to this uncertainty there is a need for improved
monitoring of both the physical and social systems. Monitoring will need to occur on a
more extensive and consistent basis. Without enhanced monitoring, the information
needed to respond to changing environmental and social conditions will be unavailable.
Monitoring and research will further understanding of both the physical and social
systems in the region, and identify the various options available to respond to change in
the face of uncertainty.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

6

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Theme 4: In the face of this uncertainty, the most compelling need is to improve
water management and hazards mitigation systems. Existing patterns of water use and
water management need improvement. Some progress has been made in improved
assessments in the recent past. Going forward, improved implementation of lessons from
these assessments in water policies and programs will be necessary. Options for adapting
to climate change and hydroclimatic hazards are discussed in greater detail in the report.
However, the people most likely to be affected by changing water security in the region
are the rural and urban poor who have the least capacity to adapt to changing
environmental and social conditions and hazards. Management of groundwater and
demand-side management are among the areas where improvements can be made.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

1
Introduction
Many glaciers and snowpacks around the world are receding. This
recession results from glacier ablation (melt and sublimation) rates that exceed the
rates of glacial formation and accretion from precipitation over time. The rates
and timing of glacial retreat vary across hemispheres, regions, and locales. The
causes of such retreat are complex and although climatic warming is an important
cause, care must be taken to recognize that in most instances there are multiple
influences that interact in ways that are difficult to predict.
Initially, glacial wasting increases the volumes of glacial meltwater in
downstream waterways. As a glacier continues to waste, a point will be reached
where the volumes of meltwater begin to decline and ultimately become zero
when the glacier has disappeared (although precipitation falling on the land area
previously occupied by the glacier will continue to contribute to downstream
flows). Wherever glaciers are wasting continuously there are concerns about the
consequences for available water supplies.
Mountains are the water towers of the world, and in many regions, the
volume and timing of streamflow from glacial and snowmelt are critical for
agricultural production, hydropower generation, water supply, and the functioning
and health of ecosystems. In the Hindu Kush-Himalayan (HKH) region (Figure
1.1) in particular, the large populations of China and South Asia rely on both the
water and electricity generation provided by the major rivers. Many basins in the
HKH region are “water stressed”, (Figure 1.2) and this stress is projected to
increase due to large forecasted population growth. This has led to concern about
potential negative impacts from changes in the availability of water supplies in the
coming decades.
Although many glaciers across the globe have retreated over recent
decades, the rates of retreat and mass loss can vary widely, indicating that a
variety of regional-scale factors such as changes in circulation, cloudiness,
precipitation, aerosol concentration, glacier geomorphology, tectonic activity, and
debris cover, in addition to warming, can affect glaciers. A recent assessment of
glaciers in the region using a combination of remote sensing and in situ data
found different patterns of glacial retreat within the HKH region (Yao et al.,
2012). Thus, a diverse range of factors affect the timing and amount of glacier-fed
streamflow, with significant potential implications for water availability and
regional stability. A recent Intelligence Community Assessment found that South
Asia is one of three regions likely to be challenged by water scarcity in the
coming decades (DNI, 2012).

7
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

8

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

FIGURE 1.1 The Hindu-Kush Himalayan region extends over 2,000 km across
South Asia and includes all or parts of: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, China,
India, Nepal, and Pakistan. The region is the source of many of Asia’s major
rivers, including the Indus, Ganges, and Brahmaputra.

FIGURE 1.2 A global map of water stressed basins. The water stress indicator is
the ratio of total water withdrawals to calculated in stream flow requirements.
Many basins in the HKH region have “high” levels of water stress. SOURCE:
Smakhtin (2008)

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Introduction

9

In the HKH region, conventional wisdom is that glacial meltwater is an
important supplement to naturally occurring run-off from precipitation and
snowmelt. While correct, the watersheds of the area each exhibit complex
hydrology and the magnitude of the contribution of glacial meltwater to the total
water supply in these rivers is less clear. The implications of accelerated rates of
glacial wastage for downstream populations have not been precisely
characterized.
Despite this fact, or perhaps because of it, there is confusion about how
changes in the climate will affect the timing, character, and rates of glacial
wastage in different parts of the HKH region. Scientific evidence indicates that
glaciers in the eastern and central part of this region are retreating at rates
comparable to those in other parts of the world, and are relatively stable, and
perhaps even advancing, in parts of the western Himalayas. These findings, the
findings of recent reviews by the U.S. Agency for International Development
(USAID, 2010) and the International Centre for Integrated Mountain
Development (ICIMOD, 2011b), and evidence presented later in this report, bring
into question the results of several earlier studies: one suggested that the glaciers
of the HKH would disappear altogether by 2035; another suggested that the
origins of accelerated glacial wastage lie with the Medieval Warm Period1 that
occurred over a thousand years ago. Neither of these assertions is supported by
scientific evidence, and they have served to create unnecessary confusion. There
is also confusion about the ultimate implications of these changes for domestic,
industrial, and agricultural water availability as well as for the various in-stream
ecological uses.
In addition, in the context of incomplete science and unresolved
uncertainties, there are other important questions about regional water security
that need to be addressed. From the beginning the Committee was mindful that it
would need to sort out these confusions and resolve any resultant
misunderstandings in order to successfully address the statement of task (Box
1.1). Included among the questions examined by the Committee in the course of
addressing their charge are the following:






What are the rates of retreat of the Himalayan Glaciers over the last
decades and how do they compare with the rates of retreat of glaciers
elsewhere in the world?
Are the rates of glacial retreat in the study region accelerating,
decelerating, or remaining static?
What proportion of the seasonal flows of the Indus and
Ganges/Brahmaputra rivers are accounted for by glacier melt?
What has been the impact of recent climate change on both glacial
wastage and streamflow in the region?
Has the relative contribution of glacier melt water to dry season or wet
season flows, increased, decreased, or remained static?

1

The Medieval Warm Period was a period of warmer climate in much of northern Europe, the
North Atlantic, southern Greenland, and Iceland. It lasted from roughly 950 to 1250 AD. It is the
“Medieval” Warm Period because it coincided with Europe’s Middle Ages (AMS, 2000).

9

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

10

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security





Would the deglaciation of the HKH region imply that the area is headed
toward water scarcity within the next few decades?
Over the next several decades2, how will these high altitude changes in
climate and hydrology compare, and interact with, other economic, social,
and demographic impacts on regional water supply and demand?
Does the retreat or accelerated retreat of HKH glaciers increase the
likelihood of natural disasters such as outburst floods from moraine
dammed lakes or seasonal flooding?

Available science does offer some important information that leads to conclusions
that are relevant to these questions.
STUDY CONTEXT AND CHARGE TO THE COMMITTEE
This report was prepared by the Committee on Himalayan Glaciers,
Hydrology, Climate Change, and Implications for Water Security, appointed by
the National Research Council (NRC) in response to a request from the
intelligence community, to address the broad charge of identifying what is known
scientifically about the glaciers of the Himalayas, their likely future, and the
implications of that future on downstream water supplies and populations (See
Box 1.1 for full Statement of Task). Part of its purpose was to clarify, where
possible, many of the misunderstandings surrounding the broad topic of glacial
retreat and its implications in the Himalayas and surrounding region. Recognition
of the significance of potential impacts of climate change on glacier-fed
streamflow and regional water supplies in the Himalayas led to the
commissioning of this study.
GEOGRAPHIC SCOPE
The focus of this study is the HKH region, which extends over 2,000 km
from east to west across the Asian continent spanning several countries (Figure
1.1): Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, India, Nepal, and Pakistan. The
eastern and western areas of the HKH region differ in climate, especially in
timing and type of precipitation, and in glacier behavior and dynamics as well.
For glaciers, there is no sharp dividing line between east and west; rather,
conditions change gradually across the region (e.g., glacier mean elevation;
Scherler, D. et al., 2011a). The eastern end is dominated by monsoonal activity in

2

Wherever possible, the Committee has attempted to limit its projections to the order of three to
four decades at most. However, in some case this was not possible. For example, decadal-scale
climate projections are currently an area of active research, and the climate modeling community
has more skill in projecting climate over longer timescales.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Introduction

11

BOX 1.1
COMMITTEE ON HIMALAYAN GLACIERS, HYDROLOGY, CLIMATE
CHANGE, AND IMPLICATIONS FOR WATER SECURITY
STATEMENT OF TASK
The Committee was charged to explore the potential impacts of climate
change on glacier-fed streamflow and regional water supplies in one region, the
Himalayas. The glaciers in this region are the headwaters of several of Asia’s
great river systems, including the Ganges/Brahmaputra, Indus, Mekong, Yangtze,
and Yellow rivers. These rivers are the sources of drinking water and irrigation
supplies for billions of people. These rivers also generate hydropower and support
important ecological values, such as fisheries. The Committee was asked to
summarize the current state of scientific understanding on questions such as:
• How sensitive are the Himalayan glaciers to changes in temperature,
precipitation, and the surface energy budget?
• What does current glaciological and climatological knowledge imply about
potential changes in climate on downstream flows? What are the likely major
impacts on water supplies and flood regimes? What additional observational and
modeling resources are needed to improve knowledge of hydro-climate trends and
forecasts?
• What management systems (including water supply, water demand, land use
and other institutions and infrastructure) are in place to manage climate-induced
changes in regional hydrology, and how might they be strengthened? In
addressing this question, the Committee will analyze the advantages and
disadvantages of various options for improving existing management systems,
which could include consideration of new management systems, but will not
recommend specific options.
• What are some of the main vulnerabilities to adjusting to changes in water
supply in these downstream areas? What are the prospects for increased
competition, or improved cooperation, between different downstream water
users? What are some of the implications for national security?
To inform its analysis, the study Committee was supported by information
gathered at an interdisciplinary workshop, using both invited presentations and
discussion to explore the issues that may affect regional streamflow and water
supplies in the face of a changing climate. The Committee examined a few
selected examples of changes in glacial melt and resultant streamflow for a
specified time horizon as a way of developing boundaries for the workshop
discussion. The thinking at the workshop took the form of linking potential
changes in temperature and precipitation to a range of changes in glacial mass
balance and regional hydrology, which in turn could lead to a range of outcomes
for downstream streamflow and water security, including water supplies and
flooding regimes.

11

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

12

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

summer while the western end is dominated by the mid-latitude westerlies3 in
winter (Thayyen and Gergan, 2010). The monsoon declines in strength from east
to west along the Himalayas, while the westerlies, weaken as they move from
west to east. This gradient divides at about 78 °E near the Sutlej valley
(Bookhagen and Burbank, 2010). To the west (Afghanistan; Kashmir and Jammu,
India; western Nepal; Pakistan), there is a general pattern of winter accumulation
and summer melt, similar to glaciers in North America and Europe. In contrast, to
the east (Bhutan; Sikkim, India; eastern Nepal), glaciers are summer accumulation
types, where both maximum accumulation and maximum ablation4 occur during
the summer. River discharge5 in the eastern end of the HKH arc appears to be
driven by monsoonal activity. Large areas of the Indus river systems are
dominated by winter snowfall from the westerlies. Monsoon activity is lower and
precipitation is dominated by winter snow in the upper Indus, Jhelum, and Chenab
basins. Ladakh, which extends from Tibet to India, is a unique cold-arid region
(Thayyen and Gergan, 2010).
The political and hydrologic boundaries within the study areas are both
important and add useful clarity to the study area definition. The political
boundaries in the region are shown in Figure 1.3a. The countries found in the
study area include all or portions of Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, China,
India, Nepal, and Pakistan. As the maps indicate, some of the political boundaries
are disputed, and boundary disputes are likely to remain a potential source of
instability for the indefinite future.
The glaciers of the region are found in the headwaters of several of Asia’s
great river systems, including the Indus, Ganges/Brahmaputra, Mekong, Yangtze,
and Yellow Rivers. These rivers are the source of drinking water and irrigation
supplies for roughly 1.5 billion people. They also generate significant quantities
of hydroelectric power and support important ecological and cultural amenities
and services. The surface water of these rivers and associated groundwater
constitute a significant strategic resource for all of Asia, which is among the most
water stressed regions of the world (Smakhtin, 2008).
The specific study area for this report includes the catchments of the Indus
and Ganges/Brahmaputra Rivers. The committee defined the primary scope of
their report as the countries that include all or part of the Indus, Ganges, or
Brahmaputra Basins, including the portion of the Tibetan Plateau included in
those basins. Based on the committee’s charge, the areas of major concern are
those where the water supply for a significant population could be influenced by
changes in the region’s glaciers. Figure 1.4 shows the percentage of glaciated area
within the river basins of the HKH region. The Indus, Ganges, and Brahmaputra
basins combined contain nearly three-quarters of the region’s glaciated area. With
the exception of the Interior basins (labeled as Himalayan Endorheic basins in
Figure 1.3c) the other river basins each contain less than five percent of the
3

The mid-latitude westerlies (westerlies) are the dominant west-to-east motion of the atmosphere,
centered over the middle latitudes of both hemispheres. At the Earth’s surface, they extend from
roughly 35° to 65° latitude (AMS, 2000).
4
Ablation includes any process that removes ice from a glacier.
5
River or stream discharge is the volumetric rate of flow (AMS, 2000).

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Introduction

13

region’s glaciated area. The Committee includes some discussion of the part of
the region covered by the Endorheic basins in Chapter 2, Physical Geography,
particularly in the section on ice core data (see Figure 2.11). Because the
population density of the Tibetan Plateau is very small (see Figure 3.1), it follows
that very few people depend on the Interior basins for water supply, and any
glacier-related changes to the water supply in those basins would not affect a
large number of people. Thus the focus of Chapter 3, Human Geography and
Water Resources is on the Indus, Ganges, and Brahmaputra basins.
Although the Mekong originates on the Tibetan Plateau and is the source
of water for the populations of Cambodia, Laos, Thailand, and Vietnam, glaciers
are a small component of water resources in the Mekong (Figure 1.4). The
Yangtze and Yellow Rivers, which provide water for large parts of China, also
originate on the Plateau, and have relatively small glacial coverage (Figure 1.4).
Because the Mekong, Yangtze, and Yellow River basins contain a relatively small
amount of glacier area, it follows that discharge in these rivers results from
snowmelt and rainfall. As discussed in Chapter 2, in most basins, the contribution
of rain far outweighs the contributions of snowmelt (e.g., Andermann et al.,
2010). These three rivers are located in the eastern part of the HKH region, where
annual precipitation is dominated by the summer monsoon (Bolch et al., 2012).
Based on these considerations, discharge in the Mekong, Yangtze, and Yellow
Rivers, is more influenced by the monsoons, and in the future, climate change
effects on the monsoon will play a greater role than any changes in the glaciers.
It is common to refer to the Tsangpo/Brahmaputra to indicate that the
upstream portion of the river on the Tibetan Plateau is called Tsangpo, while the
Brahmaputra is the proper name of the river once it enters India. To avoid
confusion, the river is referred to as the Brahmaputra throughout this report. In
this report, when discussing issues on a watershed basis, the Ganges and
Brahmaputra are grouped as a single watershed as they eventually merge before
draining into the Bay of Bengal. However, when discussing hydrologic issues, for
example river hydrographs6, the Ganges and Brahmaputra are treated separately.
The tributaries of the Indus and the Ganges/Brahmaputra rivers are depicted in
Figure 1.3b.

6

A hydrograph is a record and graphical representation of river or stream discharge as a function
of time at a specific location (AMS, 2000).

13

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

(a)

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

(b)

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

FIGURE 1.3 The (a) political boundaries, (b) hydrology, and (c) elevation of the Hindu-Kush Himalayan region. The political
boundaries map uses dashed lines to indicate disputed political boundaries, which follow the guidance issued by the U.S. State
Department, and this Committee takes no position on these boundary disputes.

(c)

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Introduction

17

FIGURE 1.4 Glacier area and percentage of total HKH-glaciated area in each of
the region’s river basins. Only the Indus, Ganges, Brahmaputra, and Interior
basins of the Tibetan Plateau contain more than five percent of the region’s
glacier area. SOURCE: ICIMOD (2011b).
The HKH region is geographically vast and complex both climatologically
and hydrologically, and this complexity is dynamic and possibly changing. This
means that it is very difficult to generalize observations and findings over the
entire region because spatial variability is large. The story that emerges in this
report is also characterized by the fact that there remain many open science
questions that cannot be answered in the absence of additional data and research.
Although global temperatures are increasing generally, and these increases have
been more rapid in recent decades, spatial variability and lack of local research
data mean that the specific manifestations of climate change are unclear in the
HKH region. This includes how quickly and regionally glaciers might retreat, and
what the subsequent impacts on the hydrologic system of the HKH region might
be. In recognition of the complexities of these issues, the NRC formed the
Committee on Himalayan Glaciers, Hydrology, Climate Change and Implications
for Water Security to begin to address some of these important questions.
STUDY APPROACH AND METHODOLOGY
The Committee was formed in the summer of 2011 and completed its
work over the course of the next 12 months. It held four meetings where it
reviewed relevant literature and other information. To inform its analysis, the
PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

18

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Committee organized an interdisciplinary workshop, using both invited
presentations and discussion to explore the issues that may affect regional
streamflow and water supplies in the face of a changing climate. The workshop,
which was held in the fall of 2011 in Washington, DC, was organized around four
broad themes: 1) regional climate and meteorology; 2) regional hydrology, water
supply, use, and management; 3) regional demography and security; and 4) risk
factors and vulnerabilities. The workshop agenda and participants are included in
Appendix A and workshop presentation summaries are included in Appendix B.
Workshop participants identified key concepts about the HKH region. Starting
from those concepts, the Committee used their expert judgment, reviews of the
literature, and deliberation to develop conclusions about the physical geography,
human geography and water resources, and environmental risk and security in the
HKH region. These conclusions are listed at the end of each chapter.
ORGANIZATION OF THE REPORT
This report covers three broad areas of knowledge about the Himalayan
region: 1) physical geography; 2) human geography and water resources; and 3)
environmental risk and security. Chapter 2, Physical Geography, provides an
overview of glaciers followed by a summary of the climate and meteorology of
the region within the context of paleoclimate patterns, and descriptions of the
regional hydrology and physical hazards. Chapter 3, Human Geography and
Water Resources, covers population distribution, poverty and migration, and key
natural resources issues of water use, access to water, water scarcity, and water
management. Chapter 4, Environmental Risk and Security, presents the
Committee’s further analyses of the linkages between physical and human
systems, with an emphasis on those that may pose potential instabilities for the
region. Chapter 5 presents the Committee’s synthesis of the range of physical and
social changes facing the region, a summary of research questions and data needs,
and options for adapting to the changes facing the region.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

2
Physical Geography
Glaciers play an important role in the global hydrologic cycle, through the storage
of water for thousands of years (Figure 2.1). Water is stored in a series of reservoirs,
including the ocean, lakes, groundwater, the atmosphere, snowpack, and glaciers. Water
movement is driven by energy; warmer air temperatures speed up the water cycle, colder
air temperatures slow the water cycle down. Water movement from the atmosphere to the
oceans and continents occurs as precipitation, including snow, sleet, and other forms of
solid precipitation. Snow that accumulates for many years may turn into a glacier. This
chapter reviews the current understanding of Hindu-Kush Himalayan (HKH) glaciers in
the context of the modern day climate setting, impacts of aerosols and black carbon1 on
the energy budget affecting the glaciers, what paleoclimate records can tell us about
current regional climate conditions, regional hydrology, and physical hazards in the
Himalayas.
GLACIER MASS BALANCE
Glacial ice is characterized by: (a) a density between about 830 and 920 kg m-3
(83 to 92 percent water content); and (b) air that is trapped in bubbles within the ice and
no longer in contact with the atmosphere. When snow initially falls on a surface it has a
density of 50 to 70 kg m-3 and within a few days has a density on the order of 100 to 300
kg m-3 (10 to 30 percent water content). Over time, through compaction of overlying
snow and through metamorphic processes, the density of snowpack gradually increases.
Snow that does not melt is carried over to the next season, where it can be buried by
subsequent snowfall. Snow that is older than a year but not yet glacial ice is called “firn”
or “névé”. The density of firn gradually increases over time and eventually the air trapped
in pockets or bubbles is no longer in contact with the atmosphere. The firn has become
glacial ice. Local climate determines the rate at which seasonal snow changes to glacier
ice (cf., Cuffey and Paterson, 2010).
Glaciers move by gravitational processes, including internal deformation caused
by shear stress imposed by overlying ice and snow, and potentially by basal sliding on a
layer of liquid or quasi-liquid water. Ice masses can flow down slopes or across flat
terrain because of the pressure produced by overlying snow and ice. Once a mass of ice
flows as a solid, it is considered to be a glacier. Patches of ice and snow that do not flow
are not glaciers.
The fundamentals of glacial behavior can be readily understood by recognizing
that glaciers have both a zone of accumulation in which the volume of the glacier grows
and a zone of ablation in which volume is lost. During the accumulation season (summer
1

Black carbon refers to particulate matter derived from the incomplete combustion of a hydrocarbon.

19
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

20

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

FIGURE 2.1 The global hydrologic cycle, or water cycle, is the process by which water
moves through a series of reservoirs, including the ocean, lakes, groundwater, the
atmosphere, snowpack, and glaciers. Water can be in any phase (solid, liquid, gas) in
these reservoirs. Water moves from the terrestrial and oceanic reservoirs to the
atmosphere through transpiration, evaporation, or sublimation. Water moves from the
atmosphere to the terrestrial and oceanic reservoirs through precipitation. Precipitation
can occur in liquid form (rain) or solid form (snow, sleet, other types). SOURCE: U.S.
Geological Survey.

FIGURE 2.2 Schematic of glacier mass balance indicating the accumulation area at
higher elevation and the ablation area at lower elevation. Accumulation includes all
processes by which solid ice (including snow) is added to a glacier, and ablation includes
all processes by which ice and snow are lost from the glacier. The equilibrium line
altitude occurs at the elevation contour where the accumulation and ablation areas meet
and the annual net mass balance is zero. SOURCE: Armstrong (2010).

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

21

in the eastern HKH and winter in the western HKH), a glacier gains mass. During the
melt season (summer in both the eastern and western HKH), some or all of that
accumulation is lost. Thus, over the course of a year the size of a glacier may increase,
decrease, or remain static. This is determined by whether accumulation or ablation
predominates or whether they are equal. The accumulation area is the upper elevation
zone where there is an annual net gain in mass and the ablation area is the lower elevation
zone where there is an annual net loss in mass. The equilibrium line altitude (ELA) is the
elevation where the accumulation and ablation zones meet and where the annual net mass
balance is zero (Figure 2.2). The annual mass balance is the net difference between
accumulation and ablation (cf., Cuffey and Paterson, 2010).
Accumulation includes all processes by which glaciers increase in snow and ice
mass such as snowfall, condensation, refreezing of rainfall, avalanche transport on to the
glacier, and blowing snow transport on to the glacier. Ablation includes all of those
processes by which glaciers lose snow and ice mass such as snowmelt, ice melt,
sublimation, blowing snow transport off of the glacier, calving and avalanche removal
(cf., Cuffey and Paterson, 2010).
When viewed as water supply systems, glaciers are analogous to lakes. Water
storage in glaciers is analogous to the total quantity of water stored in a lake. Glacial
accumulation is analogous to water input to a lake, which includes processes such as
precipitation and water carried into the lake by streams, rivers, and groundwater
channels. Glacial ablation is analogous to water removal from a lake, which includes
processes such as evaporation, water carried out of the lake by streams, rivers, and
groundwater channels, and extraction by humans. When water input sources equal water
output sources the lake is in steady state and the lake level does not change. With
glaciers, when accumulation equals ablation the volume of water stored in the glacier
does not change, and the ELA does not move. Glacial volumes decrease when ablation
persistently exceeds accumulation, the ELA moves up, and the glacier in question
ultimately disappears. This is analogous to a lake where persistent overdraft, in which
extractions exceed water input, is always self-terminating.
Several important principles follow from this discussion. First, it is the change in
the volume of the glacier, not the change in its downhill extent or areal extent that
determines whether the net change is positive or negative. However, it is difficult to
directly measure the volume of a glacier, thus measurements of glacial volumes are
scarce throughout the world. Second, where the entirety of the glacier is below the
equilibrium line, there will be no accumulation and with time the glacier will disappear.
Third, glacial mass balance information will provide an important link between variations
in glacial volume and climatic changes (Meier, 1962). A general understanding of glacial
mass balance is essential to understanding what happens to glaciers over time.
Glaciers respond to climate to reach steady state, a state with no change in the
mass balance or ELA over time. A glacier advances due to cooling temperatures or
snowfall increase, resulting in a positive mass balance. Warming temperatures or a
decrease in snowfall results in a negative mass balance and glacial retreat. A glacier that
is in disequilibrium with a warming climate will retreat until equilibrium is reestablished
or the glacier disappears.
Glaciers in mid-latitude mountain regions of the world, including those in the
HKH region, experience melt in their ablation zones at some time in most years. Melting

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

22

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

of glacier ice is a normal phenomenon. Most, if not all, mid-latitude glaciers contribute
meltwater to streams and rivers. This contribution of glacial meltwater to the discharge of
mountain streams and rivers occurs even in years with a positive glacial mass balance. A
steady-state situation occurs when climate conditions are such that glacial melt equals
accumulation and there is no change in the mass balance over some time period.
Glacier contribution to streamflow can be discussed in terms of the hydrologic
cycle (Figure 2.1) following the approach of Comeau et al. (2009). For their investigation
of glacier hydrology in the Canadian Rockies, they defined “glacial melt” and “glacial
wastage” in terms of the water equivalent. They simplified the annual glacier mass
balance by treating sublimation as negligible, and assuming no snow inputs or outputs
from avalanching, snowdrifting, or blowing snow, and no ice losses from calving. At the
high elevations of the HKH, as well as in central and northern Tibet, where it is very cold
and dry, sublimation is an important glaciological term in considering the mass balance
of the glacier, but not in hydrological considerations. Therefore, the Committee has
followed the approach of Comeau et al. (2009) in using the terms “glacial melt” and
“glacial wastage” when discussing the relationship between glacial meltwater and
streamflow. Because there are differences in meaning implied between glacier melt and
glacier wastage for different disciplines, when reporting results from other sources, the
Committee has been consistent with the language used in the original reference.
Comeau et al. (2009) defined the annual glacial mass balance as being equivalent
to the annual snowfall minus the annual snowmelt from the glacier and minus the annual
glacial ice melt. If a glacier is in equilibrium or has a positive mass balance, then the
glacial ice melt term is defined as the ice melt volume that is equal to, or less than, the
water equivalent of snow that accumulates into the glacier system in a hydrological year.
If a glacier mass balance is negative, then glacier wastage is defined as the volume of ice
melt that exceeds the water equivalent of the annual volume of snow accumulation into
the glacier system, causing an annual net loss of glacier volume. In short, glacial melt
does not by itself imply a negative mass balance or wastage. By these definitions, on an
annual basis, the presence of a glacier in a basin affects total streamflow volume through
wastage contributions only. Glacier melt is a storage term and does not contribute to
increased total annual streamflow. Within the hydrologic cycle, both glaciers and
groundwater are storage reservoirs. Following the convention of Comeau et al. (2009),
snowfall on glaciers is analagous to groundwater recharge, glacial melt is analagous to
groundwater extraction (or outflow from artesian aquifers), and glacial wastage is
analagous to groundwater overdraft. Persistant glacial wastage and persistant overdraft
are both self-terminating.
Glacial melt can affect total streamflow on a seasonal basis, and its significance is
manifest in its timing, as water is stored as snow accumulation into the glacier system and
the water equivalent runoff is delayed until ice melt in the late summer months of the
otherwise low streamflow. Therefore, the importance of glacial melt in terms of
percentage contribution to streamflow is primarily on a seasonal timescale.
An understanding of ice dynamics is required to understand the response of
glaciers to climate change (Armstrong, 2010). If climate and ice dynamics result in a
glacier extending further down slope with time, the advance of the terminus2 will increase
the total glacier area. A time lag on the order of decades or longer occurs between a
2

The glacier terminus, sometimes called the glacier snout, is the lower end of a glacier.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

23

change in climate and glacier advance or retreat and year-to-year glacier terminus
changes are likely a response to climatic events that occurred several decades or more in
the past. The majority of glaciers in the HKH region have response times on the order of
decades to a few centuries (Humphrey and Raymond, 1994; Johannesson et al., 1989).
The response time is influenced by a glacier’s area and volume, precipitation regime,
debris cover, and topographic shielding/shadowing (Kargel et al., 2011). All these factors
vary widely over the HKH and High Mountain region of Asia.
Measuring Glaciers
The easiest glacial property to measure is the location of the terminus. Simply by
walking uphill to the start of a glacier, one can locate the terminus of the glacier. The
terminus position for that year can be marked in any number of ways, including a simple
pile of rocks. Some glaciers have accurate records of their terminus position that go back
a hundred years or more. However, this simple measurement may yield erroneous
information about a glacier’s retreat and rate of retreat over short time scales of a decade
or so. Prolonged retreat of the terminus of a glacier over time scales of several decades
does indicate that the glacier is retreating.
The “glaciologic” method for determining glacier mass balance relies on a
network of stakes and pits on the glacier surface and measuring the change in surface
level between two fixed dates (an annual mass balance) or at the end of the ablation and
accumulation seasons (a seasonal mass balance) (Racoviteanu et al., 2008). This method
is considered the most accurate and provides the most information about spatial variation
(Kaser et al., 2003). However, there are currently no long-term glaciologic mass balance
records for the HKH region, and few measurements of glacier mass balance at all (Kaser
et al., 2006).
Mass balance can be estimated using the “geodetic method”. This indirect method
consists of measuring elevation changes of the glacial surface over time from various
digital elevation models (DEMs) constructed over the entire glacier surface (Racoviteanu
et al., 2008). Because of large uncertainties, the geodetic method can only be used to
estimate glacier changes at decadal or longer time scales (Kaser et al., 2003; Racoviteanu
et al., 2008).
The logistical difficulties caused by the rugged topography and remote location of
glaciers in the region make remote sensing techniques of particular interest. Remote
sensing allows for regular monitoring of glacier area, length, surface elevation, surface
flow fields, accumulation/ablation rates, albedo3, ELA, accumulation area ratio, and the
mass balance gradient. A more detailed description of glaciologic, hydrologic, geodetic,
and remote sensing glacier measurement methods is presented in Appendix C.

3

Albedo is the ratio of reflected solar radiation to incident solar radiation for a specific surface, and has a
value between 0 and 1. For example, fresh snow has an albedo of about 0.8 (AMS, 2000).

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

24

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

BOX 2.1
Cultural Importance of the Himalayas
People have traditionally revered mountains as places of sacred power and
spiritual attainment, and the Hindu Kush-Himalayan (HKH) mountains play a central role
in the spiritual, as well as practical, lives of millions of people (Bernbaum, 1998). It is
from the Himalayas that the Ganges River, considered by Hindus to be the holiest of all
rivers in India, rises and cuts its path through the valleys and gorges before it enters the
plains. The Ganges River draining the southern area of the Himalaya is considered by
Hindus to be both a goddess and a river, Ganga Mata (Mother Ganges; Eck, D. L., 1998,
2012), and is seen as sacred along its entire length. Many believe that bathing in the
Ganges frees one from past sins and liberates the soul from the cycle of birth and death.
The glaciers have particular cultural importance as the perceived source of water
for the Ganges and other rivers in the HKH. This is demonstrated by anecdotal evidence
from pilgrims who bathe in rivers and lakes near the outlet of glaciers. For example, the
Gangotri glacier is a traditional Hindu pilgrimage site. Devout Hindus consider bathing in
the waters near Gangotri town a holy ritual.
The HKH region is also home to Mt. Kailash, in western Tibet (6,600 m in
elevation), considered by many religions to be the holiest mountain in the world. This
mountain is venerated by Hindus, Buddhists, Jains, Sikhs, and believers of Bonri, the
ancient Tibetan religion (Peatty, 2011). For Hindus, Mt. Kailash is the heavenly abode of
Lord Shiva and his consort Parvati. Tibetan Buddhists view Mt. Kailash as the pagoda
palace of Demchog, the One of Supreme Bliss (Bernbaum, 2006). Mt. Kailash is
considered sacred in these religions in part because it is the headwaters of four major
rivers aligned in the cardinal directions: the Indus, the Brahmaputra, the Karnali (a major
tributary of the Ganges), and the Sutlej (a major tributary of the Indus).
One of Nepal’s most famous places of religious pilgrimage is Gosainkunda Lake
(4,400 m in elevation). Every year during the Janai Purnima festival in August, thousands
of Hindu and Buddhist pilgrims travel there by foot to bathe in the holy lake.
Glacial meltwater is strongly associated with the major lakes and rivers in the
HKH region. Rivers, glaciers, and mountains in the HKH are intertwined with the daily
activities, spiritual lives, and the cultures of the local populations. Uncertainty
surrounding the health of the glaciers and the rivers and lakes resonates deeply
throughout these cultures.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

25

TABLE 2.1 Glacial area estimates (square kilometers) from different studies.
Comparisons of glacial area among different studies are difficult because spatial extents
are often different or not well categorized.
Region
Glacier Area (km2) Data Source
HKH
114,800
WGMS (2008)
116,180
Xu, J. et al. (2009)
60,000
ICIMOD (2011b)
99,261
Yao, Tandong et al. (2012)
Central HKH
33,050
WGMS (2008)
32,182
ICIMOD: Eriksson et al. (2009)
71,182
Indian Space Agency: ISRO (2011)
Himalayas
33,050
Dyurgerov and Meier (1997, 2005)
Karakoram
15,400
Dyurgerov and Meier (1997)
16,000
Dyurgerov and Meier (2005)
16,600
Yao, Tandong et al. (2012)
Indus Basin
32,246
ISRO (2011)
36,431
Raina (2009)
21,192
ICIMOD (2011b)
Ganges Basin
18,392
ISRO (2011)
9,012
ICIMOD (2011b)
Brahmaputra Basin 20,542
ISRO (2011)
14,020
ICIMOD (2011b)
China
59,406
Chinese Academy of Sciences:
Liu, C.-H. et al. (2000)
India
37,959
Geological Survey of India in
ICIMOD (2011b)
Nepal
4,212
ISRO (2011)
Glacier Extent and Retreat Rates
The HKH region is often referred to as the “third pole” because it contains the largest ice
fields outside the polar regions. Some of the largest glaciers in the world are located here,
including the Siachen glacier on the north slopes of the Karakoram Range, which
stretches to a length of about 72 km, and is the largest non-polar glacier. Additionally, the
mountains and glaciers of the Himalayas are culturally important to the region’s
population (Box 2.1).
The major concentrations of glaciers in the high mountain area of Asia cross more
than 12 mountain ranges (Dyurgerov and Meier, 2005). There are currently no complete
glacier inventories, but there is general agreement on the area of the glaciers in the region
(Armstrong, 2010; Bolch et al., 2012). The total glacier coverage of the HKH and
theTibetan Plateau north to the Tien Shan4 is thought to exceed 110,000 km2, with about
50,000 identifiable glaciers (Dyurgerov and Meier, 2005). Table 2.1 summarizes glacial
area estimates from different sources. However, comparisons of glacial area among
4

A large mountain system located in Central Asia and to the north of this report’s study area.
PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

26

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

FIGURE 2.3 Glacial area in Nepal is shown as a function of elevation. Glacial ice ranges
from about 3,200 m to 8,500 m in elevation. Total glacial area decreased between 2001
(red line) and 2010 (black line) although the highest amount of glacial ice remained at
about 5,400 m in elevation. Glacial area decreases as the elevation increases or decreases
from 5,400 m. SOURCE: Bajracharya et al. (2011).
different studies are difficult because spatial extents are often different or not well
categorized.
Recent work by Jacob et al. (2012) shows that while previous estimates of mass
loss in the region ranged from 47 to 55 Gt yr-1, the rate may be closer to 4 ± 20 Gt yr-1.
The gaps and discrepancies in these various reports emphasize the need for a
comprehensive glacial inventory of the region. In addition, more information about how
glacier area is distributed with elevation would lead to a better understanding of how
much glacial area is in vulnerable low-elevation areas (i.e., below the ELA). Glacial
hypsometry plots the distribution of glacial area with elevation. Bajracharya et al. (2011)
have developed a glacial hypsometry for Nepal (Figure 2.3). The hypsometry shows that
glacial ice ranged in elevation from about 3,200 m to 8,500 m. The highest amount of
glaciated area was in the 100-m elevation band centered around 5,400 m. Glacial area
then decreased with both increasing and decreasing elevation.
Detailed glacier area measurements are not available for the full study area.
However, the Committee calculated the proportion of glacier area in different elevation
bands for the Indus and Ganges/Brahmaputra. In both basins, the majority of glacier area
is in the 5,000 to 6,000 m band (Figure 2.4), with a significant amount in the 4,000 to
5,000 m band. The Indus Basin has a slightly greater proportion of its glacier area below
4,000 m than the Ganges/Brahmaputra Basin, while the Ganges/Brahmaputra has a
slightly greater proportion of its glacier area above 6,000 m. Although these values
should be considered qualitative, they are consistent with the more rigorous hypsometry
data from Nepal (Figure 2.3). The differences are small, but they suggest that glacial
retreat would be more sensitive to changes in climate in the Indus basin than in the
Ganges/Brahmaputra basin, however, this qualifies evidence that glaciers are more stable
in the western Himalayas. This is because glacial retreat is sensitive to more factors than
simply elevation, including precipitation regime, local temperatures, and debris cover.
Rates of glacier retreat in the HKH are not well understood because of a lack of
field data (Kargel et al., 2011; Thompson, 2010), making it difficult to understand

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

27

FIGURE 2.4 Glacial area is shown as a function of elevation for the Indus (black bars)
and Ganges/Brahmaputra (gray bars) basins. In both basins, the majority of glacier area is
in the 5,000 to 6,000 m elevation band. Comparing the two basins, the Indus Basin has a
greater proportion of its glacier area below 4,000 m in elevation than the
Ganges/Brahmaputra, and the Ganges/Brahmaputra has a greater proportion than the
Indus of its glacier area above 6,000 m in elevation. SOURCE: Based on data from the
Natural Earth dataset of the Digital Chart of the World product and the Hydrosheds
database.
regional climate change impacts (Scherler, D. et al., 2011b). One of the most studied
glaciers in the region, AX010 in Nepal, has consistently been shown to have a negative
mass balance. If the climate conditions remain consistent with the period 1992 to 1996,
AX010 has been predicted to disappear by the year 2060 (Kadota, 1997). However, this
glacier is relatively small, with an area of only 0.38 km2, and exists at a low altitude,
extending to only 5,300 m, and thus only represents small, low-elevation glaciers (Fujita
and Nuimura, 2011). However, approximately 50 percent of the area of Nepal glaciers are
at altitudes above approximately 5,400 m (Alford et al., 2010; Bajracharya et al., 2011).
Therefore, glacier AX010 is not a good indicator of general trends in the HKH region. In
a study of glaciers in northern India, Kulkarni, A. et al. (2011) found that glaciers smaller
than 1 km2 lost an average of 28 percent of their area between 1962 and 2001, while
glaciers greater than 10 km2 lost an average of 12 percent of their area in the same time
period, further indicating that smaller glaciers cannot be used to determine regional
trends.
PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

28

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Extrapolation of these few mass balance studies over the greater High Asian
region has been used to estimate a rate of water loss from glacial retreat between 2002
and 2006 of -55 Gt yr-1 for this entire region, with -29 Gt yr-1 over the eastern Himalayas
alone (Dyurgerov, 2010). In contrast, Jacob et al. (2012) used new information from the
Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE)5 satellite mission to estimate a
mass loss of only -4 Gt yr-1 for the region of High Asian mountains for the period 2003 to
2010. The much lower estimate of glacier loss from analysis of the GRACE data is at
least in part because the GRACE satellite information integrates over the entire region, in
contrast to the study by Dyurgerov (2010), which by necessity extrapolated the few
glacier mass balance measurements collected at low elevations over the entire region.
Similarly, a recent time series using the geodetic approach based on recently
released stereo Corona satellite imagery (years 1962 and 1970), aerial images, and recent
high-resolution satellite data (Cartosat-1) to determine mass changes for ten glaciers
south and west of Mt. Everest, Nepal, show a specific mass loss between 1970 and 2007
of 0.32 ± 0.08 m of water equivalent per year. These results are consistent with the global
average (Bolch et al., 2011). Terminus measurements of 466 glaciers in the Chenab,
Parbati, and Baspa basins in the Indus catchment showed significant deglaciation
(Kulkarni, A. V. et al., 2007). Various studies have estimated the retreat of individual
glaciers in the region: the Bhagirath Kharak glacier in Uttarakhand, India retreated 7 m
per year between 1962 and 2005 (Nainwal et al., 2008); the Dokriani glacier in
Uttarakhand, India retreated 550 m between 1962 and 1995 (Dobhal et al., 2004); the
Parbati glacier in Himachal Pradesh, India retreated 578 m between 1990 and 2001
(Kulkarni, A. V. et al., 2005); the Satopanth glacier in Uttarakhand, India retreated 23 m
per year between 1962 and 2005 (Nainwal et al., 2008). While there is remaining
uncertainty about the retreat rates of specific glaciers (e.g., the Gangotri glacier in
northern India; Ahmad and Hasnain, 2004; Bhambri et al., 2011; Kumar, K. et al., 2008;
Kumar, R. et al., 2009; Naithani et al., 2001) and more mass balance measurements are
needed, in general, glaciers of the eastern HKH region have a negative mass balance and
are retreating, but not at higher rates than other mid-latitude glaciers (Bolch et al., 2012;
Racoviteanu, 2011).
In contrast to the eastern HKH, in the western HKH, Hewitt (2005) report there
has been expansion of the larger glaciers in the Karakoram region6 since about 1990,
particularly those at higher altitude. Similarly, Scherler et al. (2011b) report that for the
Karakoram region, 58 percent of the studied glacier fronts were stable or slowly
advancing with a mean rate of about +8 ± 12 m yr-1. Surging of glaciers has been
observed in Karakoram glaciers, but more field observations are needed to confirm
whether this indicates a positive mass balance. Data from the late 1980s indicated a
5 The GRACE signal is heavily influenced by groundwater extraction and sub-crustal mass and plate
movement. The HKH region is a large, complex, and tectonically active area with substantial groundwater
depletion. Therefore, use of GRACE satellite data for mass balance measurements in the HKH region leads
to substantial uncertainties (e.g., Bolch et al., 2012). Moreover, the use of GRACE satellite data to
understand groundwater is complicated by the fact that the coarse resolution of GRACE disallows
understanding groundwater overdraft patterns at the scale of individual(s) or local community consumptive
use.
6

The Karakoram region is a large mountain range spanning the border between Pakistan, India,
and China.
PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

29

possible trend of negative mass balance for the Siachen Glacier (Bhutiyani, 1999), but
more recent evidence from remote sensing data shows that glaciers in the central
Karakoram had a slightly positive mass balance between 1999 and 2008 (Gardelle et al.,
2012). The western end of the HKH appears to show slower rates of retreat, less
formation of pro-glacier lakes associated with flood hazard, and frequent observations of
advancing glaciers, compared to the eastern region (Armstrong, 2010; Bolch et al., 2012;
Hewitt, 2005). For the region as a whole, the loss of glacial ice over the last decade is
much less than previously thought (e.g., Dyurgerov, 2010).
Possible Changes in Glacier Extent and Volume
There are currently few studies of the response of HKH glaciers to changes in
climate (Cogley, 2011). Glacial mass balances in the Karakoram area of the HKH appear
to be stable, with some of the larger glaciers experiencing positive mass balances. These
results suggest that there will be little change in glacier extent over the next several
decades in this part of the HKH region. In the eastern HKH glaciers are retreating, at
rates similar to those in the rest of the world. Recent evidence shows that glaciers may be
receding at smaller rates than previously estimated (Jacob et al., 2012), although there is
still uncertainty in estimates of glacier retreat. The evidence to date suggests little change
in rates of glacial retreat and glacial extent in the eastern HKH over the next two to three
decades. Even if this is the case, the rate of glacial retreat could increase in the future
with appropriate changes in climate forcing.
Currently, retreat rates in the eastern HKH are highest at elevations below 5,000
m. This is particularly serious for those glaciers with maximum elevation below 6,000 m.
These small, low elevation glaciers are expected to sustain high rates of retreat. High
elevation communities and activities that depend on glacial meltwater generated by these
small glaciers are most likely to experience the impact of these retreating glaciers. For the
next several decades the Committee cannot state with certainty whether major changes in
either rates of glacier retreat or glacial extent in the HKH region will occur. However,
below is a worst-case scenario over a time scale of several decades that could result in
very high rates of glacier retreat.
A worst-case scenario of extensive glacial retreat is within the bounds of
possibility. One scenario involves albedo feedback processes. Because of the large
energy-albedo feedbacks associated with snow and ice, small changes in the amount and
timing of snow, and in the overall energy balance can have large effects on a glacier’s
mass balance. Fresh snow has an albedo range of about 0.75 to 0.95. In contrast, glacial
ice has an albedo range of about 0.3 to 0.4. Removing snow from a glacier, holding other
factors (air temperature, cloud cover, etc.) constant, results in a two hundred to three
hundred percent increase in the delivery of energy to the surface of the glacier. As the
exposed glacier ice heats up and then melts, more nearby snow also melts, resulting in
more energy delivery to the glacier, and more glacial wastage. This process results in a
runaway positive feedback signal that can accelerate the wastage of glacial ice. This
albedo feedback process is currently occurring in Arctic sea ice.
Another scenario involves a regional change in monsoonal activity that reduces
snowfall in the Himalayas, coupled with high amounts of black carbon deposition,

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

30

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

resulting in very high wastage rates. Imposition of increased air temperatures caused by
black carbon heating of the atmosphere would accelerate the rates of glacier wastage. A
change in monsoonal activity could result in less snowfall and more exposed glacial ice,
which could itself lead to high wastage rates. As discussed later in this Chapter, high
amounts of black carbon are being entrained in the atmosphere and deposited in the HKH
region, decreasing the albedo of glacier ice and snowpack. This decrease, even with no
increase in air temperature, could lead to increased surface wastage. In the monsoonal
region of the Himalayas, decreased albedo from deposition of black carbon is mitigated
by repeated, almost daily, snowfall during the monsoon. Black carbon deposition is also
mitigated by snow turnover processes. However, if new snow does not fall because of
changes in monsoonal activity, then black carbon transported from the Indo-Gangetic
Plain could accumulate on the snow surface, causing an acceleration of wastage rates.
Furthermore, in this scenario with less monsoon precipitation and more glacier wastage,
the contribution of glacier wastage to summer streamflow would become more important.
Such accelerated wastage rates could occur even without a change in air temperature.
However, high atmospheric loads of black carbon heat the atmosphere, which would
further accelerate melt rates. Another important effect of black carbon could be to change
the phase of precipitation (e.g., from snowfall to rainfall). Changes in climate could also
result in a shift in the precipitation phase and number of snow days in the region. For
example, Shekhar et al. (2010) found significant variations in snowfall trends in the
western Himalayas. More precipitation phase data is needed to fully understand whether
snowfall events in the region are changing and how such changes will affect glacier mass
balance. With the right conditions, accelerated rates of glacial retreat beyond present rates
are a possibility. If such a situation does arise, most likely it would be local in origin and
not global or even consistent throughout the entire HKH region.
REGIONAL CLIMATE AND METEOROLOGY
The HKH region features one of the world’s steepest slopes of an extended
mountain range, rising from its base in the alluvial Indo-Gangetic Plain near sea level to
the great height of the Tibetan Plateau (~ 8,000 m) in a distance of 100 to 400 km across
the width of the arc. Together with the Tibetan Plateau, the Himalayas exert great
influence on the powerful Asian monsoon system (Figure 2.5). As such, there is a very
high climatic gradient across the region.
The region’s climate ranges from tropical at the base of the foothills to permanent
ice and snow at the highest elevations. During the late spring and early summer, the
Plateau surface heats up quickly and serves as an elevated heat source, which draws
warm and moist air from the Indian Ocean toward the Himalayas and Tibetan Plateau
region. As the monsoon flow transports moisture from the Arabian Sea to the Indian
subcontinent, it spurs heavy monsoon rain over the Indo-Gangetic Plain and the Bay of
Bengal. During the winter, the low-level monsoon flow reverses to northeasterly, with
prevailing large-scale subsidence and relative dry conditions over India.
Over the Tibetan Plateau, rainfall is scarce all year round with annual totals of
100 to 300 mm. Most of the precipitation falls in the form of snow in winter, with more
than 50 percent of the land at elevation above 5,000 m covered by snow. In the summer,
the snow cover fraction drops to below 30 percent at the same elevation. The melted
PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

31

FIGURE 2.5 The moist air currents that drive the South Asian Monsoon are indicated by
white arrows. Monsoon flow transports moisture from the Arabian Sea to the Indian
subcontinent, resulting in heavy monsoon rain over the Indo-Gangetic Plain and the Bay
of Bengal. SOURCE: Hodges (2006)
snow reveals an arid stepped landscape interspersed with scattered glaciers and large
brackish lakes.
The climatic gradient is strong not only across, but also along the arc of the
Himalayas (Figure 2.6). The Sutlej valley serves as a rough dividing line between the
climate regimes of the western and eastern Himalayas (Bookhagen and Burbank, 2010).
In the Karakorum in the west, about two-thirds of high-altitude snowfall is due to the
mid-latitude westerlies. In the east, more than 80 percent of annual precipitation is from
the summer monsoon. (Bolch et al., 2012).
The westernmost portion of the region includes the high mountains and glaciers of
the Hindu Kush and the Karakoram, with a large number of rivers flowing into the upper
Indus River Basin in Pakistan, eventually draining into the northern Arabian Sea. This
region adjoins the arid, rugged regions of Afghanistan in the west, and the Thar Desert of
northwestern India to the south. It has a relatively dry climate, with annual precipitation
of 400 to 600 mm, primarily from wintertime storms associated with the mid-latitude
westerlies. In the cold-arid regions of Ladakh, India, the precipitation in the region is
somewhat higher in summer, but the mean annual precipitation is as low as 115 mm per
year (Thayyen and Gergan, 2010).

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

32

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

FIGURE 2.6 The climate varies across the HKH region. In the west, indicated by purple
in the figure, the climate is alpine and dominated by the mid-latitude westerlies. Most
precipitation takes the form of winter snow. This area adjoins a cold-arid climate regime,
indicated by blue in the figure. In the east, indicated by yellow in the figure, the climate is
dominated by the summer monsoon, with most of the precipitation coming during the
summer months. The Indus, Ganges, and Brahmaputra watersheds are also shown in the
figure. SOURCE: Thayyen and Gergan (2010).
Further east along the arc is the Greater Himalayan Range. This region includes
snowcapped high mountains and foothills in northwestern India, Nepal, and Bhutan,
forming the northern boundary of the fertile and populous Indo-Gangetic Plain, where the
Ganges River flows. Rainfall is higher in the east, mostly from summer monsoon rain.
The Bay of Bengal, in which the Ganges/Brahmaputra rivers flow out to sea is the wettest
part of the Indian monsoon region Bookhagen and Burbank (2010) reviewed precipitation
data for the 10-year period from 1998 to 2007. They showed that mean annual rainfall
ranges from ~1 to more than 4 m in the monsoon-precipitation dominated portions of the
region.
Role of Aerosols in Regional Climate
Aerosols are suspended fine particles in the atmosphere that have both natural and
manmade sources. Aerosols from natural sources such as desert dusts have been known
to co-exist with the Indian monsoon in the eastern HKH region for a long time. During
April and May, dusts are transported by the mid-latitude westerlies from the deserts in the
Middle East, Afghanistan, and the Thar Desert in northwestern India to the Indo-Gangetic
Plain and Himalayas.
Since the Industrial Revolution, atmospheric loading of aerosols from manmade
sources such as factories, power plants, cooking and heating, and slash-and-burn
agricultural practices has greatly increased, making the Indo-Gangetic Plain one of the
PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

April

33

May

June

FIGURE 2.7 Climatological monthly distribution of Aerosol Optical Thickness (AOT)
during April, May, June from MODIS (upper panels), and vertical distributions across the
Tibetan Plateau from CALIPSO (lower Panel, horizontal scale shows latitude/longitude
coordinates) show the deep and extended layer of aerosols over vast regions of the IndoGangetic Plain and Himalayan foothills. Some aerosol can be detected over the top of the
Tibetan Plateau. SOURCE: Gautam et al. (2010).
most polluted regions in the world. These aerosols often appear in the form of a brownish
haze known as atmospheric brown clouds (Ramanathan et al., 2005). A key component of
these brown clouds is black carbon, commonly known as soot. Black carbon sources
include internal combustion engines, power plants, heat boilers, waste incinerators, slash
and burn agricultural activities, and forest fires. While some aerosol species have a
cooling effect, airborne black carbon strongly absorbs solar radiation and heats up the
atmosphere. Recent studies have shown that aerosols, in particular black carbon because
of its ability to heat the atmosphere, can affect the regional and global water cycles,
including the Himalayan snowpack and glaciers, by altering the radiation balance of the
Earth’s atmosphere and surface, and modulating cloud and rain formation processes (Lau
et al., 2010; Ramanathan et al., 2005; Rosenfeld et al., 2008). Because aerosols have the
capability to regulate atmospheric heat sources and sinks, modulate monsoon rainfall,
surface evaporation and river run off, and possibly affect melting of high mountain
snowpack and glaciers, they are an integral component of the monsoon climate system.
The atmospheric loading of aerosols is measured in terms of the aerosol optical
thickness (AOT), which is quantitatively determined by the amount of solar radiation
attenuation at the Earth’s surface by the aerosol. During the late spring and early summer
season (April to June), the AOT builds up dramatically over the Indo-Gangetic Plain and
northwestern India (Figure 2.7, upper panels). The monsoon flow is blocked by the
Tibetan Plateau, and forced to rise over the Himalayas foothills and northern India. As a
result, aerosols transported from remote deserts and from local emissions accumulate
against the Himalayas foothills to a great height (> 5 km) and spread over the entire IndoPREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

34

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

FIGURE 2.8 Monthly distribution of Aerosol Optical Thickness (AOT) during
November, December, January, from MODIS (upper panels), and vertical distributions
across the Himalayas Tibetan Plateau from CALIPSO (lower Panel, horizontal scale
shows latitude/longitude coordinates) show high concentration of aerosols confined
within the shallow boundary layer over the Indo-Gangetic Plain and Himalayan foothills.
SOURCE: Gautam (2011).
Gangetic Plain and regions to the south (Figure 2.7, lower panel). Additionally,
the southwest monsoon flow brings increasingly warm, moist, and unstable oceanic air
from the Indian Ocean and the Arabian Sea to the Indo-Gangetic Plain and the Himalayan
foothills. The mixture of dust and black carbon in the deep aerosol layer provides
efficient heating of the atmosphere. It interacts with the warm moist monsoon air and
maximizes the atmospheric water cycle feedback, and may significantly modulate the
summer monsoon rainfall (Lau et al., 2006; Lau et al., 2008).
In contrast, during winter, the prevailing monsoon flow is cold, dry northeasterly
with large-scale subsidence. Local emissions of aerosols from the Indo-Gangetic Plain
are transported by the northeasterly flow in the form of atmospheric brown cloud plumes
emanating from the source region over the Indo-Gangetic Plain to the adjacent ocean
(Figure 2.8, upper panels), and are trapped within the stable, and low boundary layer (< 1
km; Figure 2.8, lower panel). In winter, the atmospheric brown clouds have a higher
contribution from local black carbon emissions, but little contribution from dust, because
of lack of deserts upwind. The black carbon aerosol heats the boundary layer air, but
cools the land surface, thus further increasing atmospheric stability, suppressing
convection and the already-scarce wintertime rainfall. The wintertime high aerosol
loading within the boundary layer in the Indo-Gangetic Plain is well known for its
adverse impacts on local climate, especially on visibility, aviation safety, and human
PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

35

health. However, the aerosols will have minimal large-scale atmospheric water cycle
feedback because the large, stable boundary layer and the free atmosphere above is
effectively isolated from the aerosol forcing.
Possible Effects of Aerosols on Glacier and Snowpack
The growth and decay of Himalayan snowpack and glaciers are strongly
dependent on changes in the fluctuations of South Asian monsoon climate, and aerosols
can affect monsoon temperature and rainfall (Ramanathan and Carmichael, 2008).
Ramanathan et al. (2005) suggested that through the reduction of surface solar
radiation—the so-called dimming effect—aerosols cool the Earth’s surface beneath the
aerosol layer. The cooling reduces the land-sea thermal contrast and north-south sea
surface temperature gradient, which in turn may lead to weakening of the Asian
monsoon.
Other studies have focused on the effect of solar heating by absorbing aerosols
(desert dust and black carbon) and induced atmosphere-land feedbacks on the Asian
monsoon (Bollasina et al., 2008; Lau and Kim, 2006; Lau et al., 2006; Lau et al., 2008;
Meehl et al., 2008; Menon et al., 2002; Wang et al., 2009). Observation studies have
shown that desert dust aerosols found over the Indo-Gangetic Plain are more absorbing
compared with natural dusts from other parts of the world (Eck, T. F. et al., 2005;
Ramana et al., 2004). These studies suggest that dust particles transported from the
adjacent deserts may have been coated with fine soot particles during their passage over
the highly industrial regions of the Indo-Gangetic Plain, thus becoming stronger
absorbers of solar radiation. It is possible these highly absorbing aerosols could be
instrumental in providing anomalous heating of the atmosphere over northern India and
the Tibetan Plateau, through the atmospheric water cycle feedback—the so-called
“Elevated Heat Pump (EHP) effect—causing monsoon rainfall to shift northward toward
the Himalaya foothills and northern India during the late spring to early summer
monsoon season.
The EHP effect is thought to be most effective in May and June, because of the
great depth and vast horizontal extent of the aerosol layer over the Indo-Gangetic Plain,
and its interaction with the warm, moist unstable environment. In contrast, the EHP effect
is minimized in the winter because of the cold, dry stable air mass, and the confinement
of aerosols within the shallow atmospheric boundary layer and narrow regions over the
Indo-Gangetic Plain. Based on experiments with a global climate model, Lau et al. (2010)
showed that the EHP effect caused by dust and soot over the Indo-Gangetic Plain during
late spring and early summer could lead to early and accelerated melting of Himalayan
seasonal snowpack via aerosol induced atmosphere-land surface feedback.
Other studies, however, have questioned and debated the importance of the EHP
based on analyses of observations (e.g., Lau and Kim, 2011b; Nigam and Bollasina,
2010). Several global modeling studies have suggested that much of the aerosol forcing
of monsoon changes may be caused by non-local processes. These include changes in
radiative fluxes reaching the ocean surface that help power the monsoon (Wang et al.,
2009), consistent with theoretical work on the importance of moist processes rather than
land-sea contrasts in creating the monsoon (Boos and Kuang, 2010), remote sea surface

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

36

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

temperature forcing (Meehl et al., 2008) and large-scale atmospheric circulation changes
(Bollasina et al., 2011). Various studies have also shown evidence that the summer
monsoon has weakened over the past 50 years. Analysis of rainfall data for the second
half of the twentieth century showed a decreasing trend in the length of the monsoon
(Dash et al., 2009; Ramesh and Goswami, 2007). Model results also indicate reduced
rainfall over India, with small increases over the Tibetan Plateau (Meehl et al., 2008).
While current studies are consistent in finding that aerosols can substantially perturb the
timing and intensity of the South Asian monsoon, further work is needed to clarify the
magnitude of these effects and to determine the relative importance of the various
proposed mechanisms.
An additional important mechanism whereby absorbing aerosols may cause early
melting of snowpack and accelerated glacier retreat is the so-called snow-darkening
effect. Dust and soot transported from emission sources in the Indo-Gangetic Plain and
from remote regions have been found as impurities deposited in Himalayan snowpack
and glaciers. These impurities caused a characteristic reduction in the reflectivity of the
snow and ice surface in the visible range (Warren and Wiscombe, 1980), lowering the
albedo of snow and ice and leading to more solar radiation absorption and possible
accelerated rate of snow melt and glacier retreat.
Recent studies in the HKH region implicate snow darkening by black carbon and
dust as a possible cause of glacier retreat. Xu et al. (2009) deduced from observed icecore samples in Tibetan glaciers that black carbon deposition may have contributed to
their rapid retreat. Large, shallow glaciers such as those in the western HKH will be
affected more by black carbon deposition than small glaciers with steep surrounding
mountains such as those in the eastern HKH, because their snow-turnover rate7 is higher.
This indicates some uncertainty in the effect of black carbon on glacier retreat, but also
that there are many factors that influence glacial retreat, and these factors interact in ways
that are difficult to predict. Menon et al. (2010) found from model experiments a 0.9
percent reduction in snow/ice cover over the Himalayas region between 1990 and 2000
due to increased aerosol loading over the Indian subcontinent, with a large contribution
from black carbon caused by emissions from coal and biofuel. Shindell et al. (2012)
found that reductions of black carbon and co-emitted pollutants lead to large decreases in
Himalayan snow/ice albedo forcing, and that the net mitigation of surface warming by the
emissions reductions was strongly enhanced in at least part of that area. However,
because of the use of low-resolution models in these studies, it is unlikely that details of
aerosol transport across the Himalayan ranges are captured. Further observations are
needed to confirm the results of these model studies. For example, Shrestha, P. et al.
(2010) found that black carbon was about 10 percent of the total aerosol composition
based on measurements at two low latitude sites in central Nepal. The effect of different
types of snow cover, including black carbon, on albedo have been investigated using
remote sensing (Negi and Kokhanovsky, 2011a, b; Negi et al., 2009). Surface
observations of the amount of black carbon deposited on glacier surfaces and how much
it affects the albedo are needed.
Kaspari et al. (2011) found increased black carbon concentrations in century-old
deep ice-core consistent with black carbon from manmade sources being transported to
high elevations of the Himalayas (although the reported total black carbon concentrations
7

Snow turnover occurs due to avalanches, gravitational processes, and event-driven snowfall.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

37

were surprisingly large, raising some concerns about data quality). Using atmospheric
black carbon loading at the Ev-K2 Nepal Climate Observation-Pyramid site, Yasunari et
al. (2010) estimated a plausible reduction of surface albedo due to black carbon
deposition of 2 to 6 percent, and a corresponding 10 to 30 percent increase in the annual
runoff for a typical Tibetan glacier. Using MODIS satellite data and comparing snow
albedo before and after major dust storms, Gautam et al. (2011) estimated a 6 to 8 percent
reduction in surface albedo. However observations of dust and black carbon and their
effects of surface albedo are still scarce, with large uncertainties due to a lack of
instrumental records and limited sampling. Likewise, representation of snow-darkening
processes in climate models is still in its early development stage (Flanner et al., 2009;
Flanner et al., 2007; Yasunari et al., 2011).
Current Trends and Projections of Regional Climate
Reports of surface air temperature and precipitation trends vary greatly across the
Himalayas. An increase in maximum and minimum daily temperature of 1.0 to 3.4 oC
was found across the Himalayas between 1988 and 2008 (Bhutiyani et al., 2007; Shekhar
et al., 2010; Shrestha, A. et al., 1999). In Nepal, the maximum daily surface temperature
was found to be increasing at a rate of 0.5 to 1.0 oC per decade from the late 1960s to the
mid 2000s. The temperature increase has a tight gradient across the Himalayas with the
faster rates of warming at higher elevations, and slower warming rates or even a slight
cooling trend found in the lower elevations. This rate of surface warming is more than
five times that of global warming by greenhouse gases, suggesting the importance of
local heating processes. It should be noted however, that many of the high elevation
stations are located in deep valleys, and are not actually high elevation. They are not
evenly distributed and often are located in villages or urban centers, increasing the
potential for urban heat island effects on the data.
In contrast, in the northwestern Himalayas and Karakoram, the trends are less clear.
A decreasing trend of both maximum and minimum temperature of 1.6 and 3.0 oC
respectively has been found (Shekhar et al., 2010). Other studies how a general warming
trend, with an increase of 0.06 °C per decade during the monsoon season and 0.14 °C per
decade during the winter (Bhutiyani et al., 2010). Over the same region, an increasing
trend in winter precipitation, most likely associated with changes in the mid-latitude
westerlies, has also been reported (Fowler and Archer, 2006). However, a recent review
of instrumental records in the northwestern Himalayas and Karakoram show no trend in
winter precipitation and a decrease in monsoon precipitation between 1866 and 2006
(Bhutiyani et al., 2010). It should be noted that many of these findings are based on in
situ historical observations from a very sparse network of stations, especially at higher
elevations. While they provide an extremely important picture of climate trends in the
HKH region, they are subject to uncertainties due to inadequate spatial and temporal
resolution, possible data inhomogeneity, and local effects.
Satellite remote sensing data have revealed critical spatial and temporal
information regarding temperature and precipitation changes in recent decades in the
HKH region. Microwave satellite measurements have revealed a widespread warming
trend in the troposphere column above the Himalayan-Gangetic region (Figure 2.14 and

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

38

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

FIGURE 2.9 (a) Zonal mean (40 to 100 °E) latitudinal profile of mid-tropospheric
temperature trend for the pre-monsoon season (March–April–May) from 1979 to 2007,
and (b) spatial distribution of the mid-tropospheric temperature trend over the Indian
Monsoon region in May. Open circles denote significance of linear trends at 95 percent.
The warming trend in the pre-monsoon period gives rise to an increase in the
tropospheric land-sea thermal gradient. SOURCE: Gautam et al. (2009b).

FIGURE 2.10 Red and blue solid lines show interannual variations of temperatures in the
middle (4 to 7 km) and lower (surface to 4 km) troposphere, respectively, over northern
India (25 to 35 °N, 69to 82 °E) for March–April–May (MAM) period between 1979 and
2007. Dashed lines indicate the linear trends within the middle (red) and lower (blue)
troposphere, respectively. Aerosol Index variations during MAM over northern India
since 1979 are shown by the black dashed line. There is high coherence between
interannual variations of tropospheric temperature and aerosol index for absorbing
aerosols over the Himalaya foothills and the Indo-Gangetic Plain, with both temperature
and aerosol showing a steady rising trend between 1979 and 2007. SOURCE: Gautam et
al. (2010).

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

39

Gautam et al., 2009b; Ramanathan et al., 2005). The warming trend is most pronounced
in the pre-monsoon season (April to May) over the western Himalayas and northern
Pakistan region, with a maximum warming rate of approximately 0.8 oC per decade
between 1979 and 2007 (right panel, Figure 2.13). This widespread warming also gives
rise to an increase in tropospheric land-sea thermal gradient (left panel Figure 2.13),
which favors a stronger monsoon. Prasad et al. (2009) reported large seasonal variations
in the tropospheric warming trend, with the statistically significant enhanced warming
during the months December to May, and more warming over the western than the
eastern Himalayas. Interestingly, the pre-monsoon tropospheric warming coupled with
the cooling at the surface inferred from tree ring records in Nepal in recent decades is
consistent with the direct effect of absorbing aerosols in warming the atmosphere and
cooling the surface (Ramanathan et al., 2005; Satheesh and Ramanathan, 2000).
Figure 2.14 shows that there is high coherence between interannual variations of
tropospheric temperature and aerosol index for absorbing aerosols satellite measurements
over the Himalaya foothills and the Indo-Gangetic Plain, with both temperature and
aerosol showing a steady rising trend between 1979 and 2007. From field measurements
of aerosol optical properties and surface solar flux, the aerosols over the HimalayasGangetic Plain are found to be very absorbing with single scattering albedo of 0.89 ±
0.01 (at 550 nm). Scaled by the vertical distribution of aerosols from the spaceborne
Cloud Aerosol Lidar with Orthogonal Polarization (CALIOP) observations, this value of
single scattering albedo yields a model simulated aerosol induced solar heating profile
with maximum heating in the middle troposphere (4 to 5 km) in the order of 2 to 5 oC per
day.
In conjunction with the tropospheric temperature increases, Gautam et al. (2009a)
also found that the early summer monsoon rainfall over northern India has been on the
rise since the 1950s, with over 20 percent increase for the period 1950 to 2004. These
results are in agreement with recent observations of increased pre-monsoon rainfall over
northern India (Lau and Kim, 2010), and suggest a future possibility of an emerging
rainfall pattern of a wetter monsoon over northern India in late spring and early summer
followed by a drier period in central and southern India. Other studies have indicated a
weakening of the monsoon, with a trend of fewer rain days over the latter half of the
twentieth century (Dash et al., 2009; Meehl et al., 2008; Ramesh and Goswami, 2007).
A growing number of recent modeling studies have suggested a causal
relationship between Himalayan snow cover changes and the increased loading of
absorbing aerosols in the Indo-Gangetic Plain. Menon et al. (2010) reported that the snow
cover in the Himalayas estimated from satellites declined by about 5 to 10 percent during
the period 1990 to 2001, and that about 30 percent of the decline is due to increased black
carbon aerosols in India. Flanner et al. (2009) found that the effects of carbonaceous
aerosols are comparable to that due to greenhouse gases in causing the decline in
Eurasian spring time snow/ice cover. Lau et al. (2010) showed that the effect of black
carbon and dust heating of the atmosphere can lead to an early thawing of the snowpack
starting in April, and accelerated melting in May to June in the western Himalayas by 8
to 10 percent. Qian et al. (2011) showed deposition of black carbon in snow cover over
the Himalayas and Tibetan Plateau can contribute to a significant change in the
anomalous surface radiative fluxes, and rainfall re-distribution in the Asian monsoon
from pre-industrial to present-day climate forcing.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

40

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

In addition to greenhouse gas warming, regional effects of atmospheric heating
and the darkening of the snow and ice surface by dust and black carbon may play an
important role in causing the rainfall and temperature trends, as well as accelerated retreat
of the Himalayan glaciers and snowpack (Flanner et al., 2009; Gautam et al., 2009a;
Gautam et al., 2010; Gautam et al., 2009b; Lau and Kim, 2006; Lau et al., 2010; Lau et
al., 2008; Menon et al., 2010; Qian et al., 2011; Ramanathan et al., 2007; Yasunari et al.,
2010). Moreover, black carbon on snowpack and glaciers could have a time-delayed
effect. A recent study showed that in the Tien Shan Glacier in Tibet, black carbon
concentration at the bottom of un-melted snowpack is much higher than at the surface,
due to flushing of black carbon by snowmelt that re-freezes at lower layers (Xu et al.,
2012). If the ELA rises in response to warmer temperatures, the black carbon-rich snow
may be re-exposed, increasing solar absorption, and further accelerating the retreat of the
snowpack or glacier.
The questions of how aerosols may have affected, and how they will further affect
the Asian monsoon and Himalayan glacier retreat in the future, remain subjects of
ongoing research. One scenario is that unless effective emission control on black carbon
is achieved, the continued increased atmospheric loading of black carbon over Asia will
exacerbate the solar dimming effect causing further reduction in land-sea thermal contrast
and meridional temperature gradient. Such reductions will in turn reduce evaporation and
available moisture in the atmosphere, leading to a spin down of the monsoon large-scale
circulation and thus a weakening of the monsoon with reduced rainfall over the Indian
subcontinent (Meehl et al., 2008; Ramanathan et al., 2005). Another scenario (Gautam et
al., 2010; Gautam et al., 2009b; Lau et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2009) is that the initial
heating of the atmosphere by increasing dust and black carbon in the pre-monsoon period
may actually increase the meridional tropospheric temperature gradient and induce
atmospheric feedback bringing more moisture and rainfall into the Himalayan region in
the late spring and early summer season. This effect will lead to early and accelerated
seasonal wasting of the Himalayan snowpack. The increased cloudiness and rainfall in
the early monsoon could lead to lower land surface temperature, and subsequently an
early termination or a weakened peak monsoon through atmosphere land-surface and
cloud feedback. How much these two scenarios have been in effect in explaining
historical trends in monsoon rainfall is still a matter of debate and active ongoing
research. The fate of the Himalayan glaciers is strongly dependent on precipitation
changes in the region, associated with the vagaries of the Asian summer monsoon and the
mid-latitude westerlies winter precipitation regime. Better data from both ground-based
and space-based observations, as well as improved modeling capability are required to
understand and predict the trends of precipitation, temperature, and glacier retreat, and
their impacts on river runoff and fresh water supply affecting the downstream
populations.
Evaluation of model projections is largely based on comparison of their historical
simulations with observations. As described previously, temperature shows a general
warming trend, over the last three decades in particular (Christensen et al., 2007).
Evidence shows that temperature is increasing more rapidly with altitude, although there
are fewer observation stations at higher elevations, leading to a potential data bias. The
eastern and central Himalayan regions (dominated by the monsoon) show a decline in
precipitation over the past ~50 years, while the western Himalayas show no precipitation

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

41

FIGURE 2.11 Mean projected changes in the AR4 models for surface temperature (top)
and precipitation (center row) for the annual average (left), December to February (center
column) and June to August (right). Changes are shown for the mid-range SRES A1B
scenario for 2080 to 2099 relative to 1980 to 1999. The lower row shows the number of
models out of the 21 analyzed that projected increases in precipitation (increases in
temperature were consistent across models). These projections show warming throughout
the region and in all seasons, with greater magnitude over the Tibetan plateau than over
the South Asian continent south of the Himalayas. SOURCE: Christensen et al. (2007).
trend in the monsoon season. Winter precipitation in the western Himalayas shows an
increasing trend. The relative importance of various forcing agents and of unforced,
internal variability in the climate system in driving these trends is not fully clear.
Nonetheless, the ability of models to reproduce these trends remains one of the most
important tests of the credibility of model projections.
Climate model projections show warming throughout the region and in all
seasons, with greater magnitude over the Tibetan plateau than over the South Asian
continent south of the Himalayas (Figure 2.15). Temperature changes over the next two
to three decades show similar spatial patterns but a smaller magnitude. These trends are
consistent across models in the sense that the ensemble mean change is greater than the
standard deviation across the individual models, and are consistent across scenarios
though the magnitude varies somewhat (about 25 percent greater or less than the A1B
results depending on the emission scenario). Models are generally fairly successful in
reproducing the historical temperature trends, inspiring confidence in their projections.
Precipitation projections, however, vary substantially across models and models
often do not capture historical trends well. The most robust feature is a long-term
projected increase in boreal summer precipitation in the Eastern Himalayas and
Bangladesh, which is seen in most models over the 21st century (Figure 5.4). This leads to
PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

42

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

a consistent projection of increased annual mean river runoff in the Ganges and
Brahmaputra in the models run in support of the IPCC AR4. A majority of models show
a drying trend in winter precipitation in the central Himalayan foothills, but a substantial
fraction do not. Over the western Himalayas, models are about as likely to show increases
as decreases in precipitation in either season. Many models show trends that vary over
time, with, for example, negative rainfall trends in the next decade for the Himalayan
foothills but enhanced precipitation in the latter half of the century. Results of the nextgeneration models run in support of the IPCC AR5 are being analyzed as this report was
being written, and may provide more robust indications of likely precipitation changes in
this region. Further research may also provide better understanding of the role of black
carbon aerosols in driving precipitation changes in this region. This appears to be
substantial, and thus could contribute to some of the divergence across AR4 models as
many did not include black carbon in their projections.
There have been fewer analyses of projected changes in extremes even though
there is increasing observational evidence of increased extreme heavy rain in monsoon
regions (Gao et al., 2002; Goswami et al., 2006; Rajeevan et al., 2008). It appears that
both global and regional models are somewhat more consistent in projecting an increase
in the frequency of extreme precipitation events as the climate warms (Christensen et al.,
2007). Such a change in variability may have more severe consequences than a change in
the mean precipitation. However, confidence in these projections is again tempered by
the limited ability of models to accurately represent observed variability, especially in the
monsoon systems.
PALEOCLIMATE
Meteorological records from the HKH region are scarce and many of those that
do exist only extend back to the mid-1950s to early 1960s. Thus, assessing climatic
change there, including its true long-term significance and likely future impact, is
hampered by a paucity of long-term meteorological and glaciological observations from
the higher and more remote elevations of Asia. Regardless, evidence suggests that the
eastern Himalayas and the Tibetan Plateau are warming overall (Diaz and Bradley, 1997;
Liu, X. and Chen, 2000; Shrestha, A. et al., 1999) and this warming appears to be
increasing with elevation, at least up to 4,800 m (Liu, X. and Chen, 2000; Qin et al.,
2009). In the western Himalayas, the situation is more complex with all but the
Karakoram having warmed since at least the 1980s (Bhutiyani et al., 2007; Fowler and
Archer, 2006; Shekhar et al., 2010). The Karakorum remains the principal regional
climate anomaly as it likewise is regarding current glacier activity.
Unfortunately, these modern climate studies provide no meaningful insights into
how significant the recent observed changes in climate have been compared to the natural
variability of the region’s climate, because the observation records are too short. This
provides the motivation for using centuries- to millennia-long annual tree-ring
chronologies as well as ice cores to reconstruct climate over the HKH. Moraine dating
can also provide useful information despite not having the same temporal resolution as
tree-chronologies. Specifically, it can provide evidence of past glacial behavior. Morainedating studies have indicated spatial and temporal variation in the advance and retreat of

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

43

glaciers in the region. Studies suggest that HKH glaciers have not responded uniformly to
climatic forcing in the past. For example, Benn and Owen (1998) used moraine dating in
the Kunlun Mountains along the northern edge of the Tibetan Plateau to determine that
during the last glacial cycle, glacier advance was not synchronous. Other studies have
shown there may be a relationship between the spatial and temporal patterns of glacial
advance and retreat in the region and the spatial and temporal patterns of the monsoon
(Owen et al., 2005; Owen et al., 2002). A recent study of glaciers in northern India
confirmed that on the millennial-scale, patterns of glacier advance and retreat are related
to patterns of monsoon variability (Scherler, Dirk et al., 2010). More studies of this type
would increase understanding of glacier behavior and climate response in the region.
Tree Rings
Tree-ring chronologies can be used to reconstruct climate over the HKH, but to
date have not been used to provide a direct history of glacial advance and retreat in the
Himalayas using dendrochronological dating methods to reconstruct glacier fluctuations
from dead trees overridden by advancing glaciers (e.g., Holzhauser et al., 2005;
Luckman, 1993). This is because the HKH glaciers are almost all above treeline, which
severely restricts the availability of tree-ring material for dating past glacier advances and
associated retreats. With this in mind, three papers have been published on tree growth
and related glacier activity in the Himalayas: Singh, J. and Yadav (2000), Bhattacharyya
et al. (2006), and Borgaonkar et al. (2009). None have directly dated the timing and
extent of past glacier fluctuations in the Himalayas using the dendrochronological dating
methods used elsewhere in Europe and North America. Rather, the Himalayan studies
have inferred likely changes in past and present glacier activity through changes in tree
growth thought to be related to climate (primarily temperature). Thus, we are limited to
using tree rings for reconstructing climate over the HKH, using that information to
determine how anomalous recent changes in climate are compared to the past, and
inferring the degree to which those anomalous changes may be responsible for the
observed retreats of the HKH glaciers.
Annual tree-ring chronologies are well suited for reconstructing past climatic
variability and change in the HKH region because they are annually resolved and exactly
dated, making them useful for direct calibration and reconstruction of instrumental
climate data back in time. When this is done, some form of statistical validation of the
tree-ring estimates of past climate is commonly conducted by comparing climate data
withheld from calibration exercises to the tree-ring estimates. This process of verification
(Fritts, 1976) has a long history of use in dendroclimatology and is a direct measure of
reconstruction accuracy. Cook and Kairiukstis (1990) and Cook and Pederson (2010)
provide discussions of statistical validation in dendroclimatology. Estimates of
reconstruction precision can also be obtained from error (or uncertainty) estimates
associated with the calibration exercise. In regression analysis, this typically involves the
use of the root mean square error of the fitted model to determine error estimates around
each reconstructed value back in time. Doing so is a relatively recent development in
statistical dendroclimatology, one that has not been done in the papers cited here on treering research in the HKH region.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

44

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

When it is not possible to directly calibrate tree-ring records against climate data,
as can be the case in the data-poor regions of the HKH, it is often still possible to infer
past changes in climate from them at certain highly stressed locations, like temperature
change from tree growth at upper timberline locations. However, such inferences are far
weaker for interpreting past changes of climate from tree growth compared to direct
calibration and validation using instrumental climate data.
Using tree rings to study past climate in the Himalayas began over 20 years ago
(e.g., Ahmed, 1989; Bhattacharyya et al., 1988; Hughes and Davies, 1987; Pant, 1979)
and accelerated quite dramatically in the 1990s (e.g., Bhattacharyya et al., 1992;
Borgaonkar et al., 1994; Bräuning, 1994; Esper et al., 1995; Yadav and Bhattacharyya,
1992). Thus, the literature on this topic is quite extensive and somewhat variable in its
methods of analysis, findings, and interpretations, making a comprehensive literature
review for this report impractical. However, the findings on current and past climate
change from tree rings in the HKH are nonetheless reasonably consistent for large
regions of the HKH and for some seasons. This is most apparent from the many series
that extend back into the Little Ice Age (LIA) roughly 300 to 500 years ago. It is far more
difficult to make a useful assessment of what climate was like during the Medieval Warm
Period in the Himalayas, some 1,000 years ago, because such long tree-ring records are
relatively rare. Therefore, no further reference to the Medieval Warm Period will be
made in this review. The following summary is divided into two climatic change topics
over the HKH: temperature and precipitation. For each of these topics, the review of treering evidence for climatic change then proceeds from the western to eastern ends of the
HKH and up onto the eastern end of the Tibetan Plateau.
Temperature
There is evidence for recent climate warming over large parts of the HKH since
the LIA, with the latter decades of the 20th century often being the warmest overall. This
is apparent from inferred or calibrated tree-ring reconstructions of past summer
temperature in the western Tien Shan in Kirghizia (Esper et al., 2003) and the Karakoram
in northern Pakistan (Esper et al., 2002). In the western and central Himalayas of India
and Nepal the temperature histories from tree rings are somewhat less seasonally
consistent with respect to climate warming since the LIA. In the western Indian
Himalayas, Borgaonkar et al. (2009; 2011) described tree-ring evidence for anomalous
winter warming that is especially evident since the mid-20th century. Cook et al. (2003)
found similar evidence for long-term warming in an all-Nepal cold-season temperature
reconstruction. In contrast, Yadav et al. (1997, 1999) and Yadav and Singh (2002)
produced spring temperature reconstructions with very subdued warming trends since the
LIA and even a small degree of cooling indicated during the latter half of 20th century.
Independently, Cook et al. (2003) and Sano et al. (2005) produced similar results in
reconstructions of February to June and March to September temperatures, respectively,
from Nepal.
The appearance of a cooling trend in predominantly spring temperatures during
the late 20th century prompted Yadav et al. (2004) to suggest that the western Indian
Himalayas were defying global warming. This was apparently due to daily minimum

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

45

temperatures in the western Himalayas decreasing about three times faster than daily
maximum temperatures, thus resulting in an overall cooling trend in mean daily
temperatures for the spring months. In contrast, Borgaonkar et al. (2009; 2011) produced
several tree-ring records from the same region that showed accelerated growth due to
warmer winter temperatures since the mid-20th century. Coupled with the long-term
winter warming trend produced by Cook et al. (2003) for Nepal, this implies that winter
temperatures in the western Himalayas have been trending opposite to predominantly
spring temperatures in recent decades. It is unclear why this appears to be happening,
although the cooling trend in surface temperature could be related to increasing
atmospheric loading of aerosols in this region.
Moving eastward to Bhutan, recently developed unpublished results indicate a
substantial summer season warming trend there since 1700 based on a large-scale
composite of Himalayan spruce (Picea spinulosa) tree-ring data that begin in 1400
(Figure 2.9). There is a pronounced below-average growth period from 1590 to 1820 in
the data, interpreted here as the LIA in Bhutan, followed by a nearly monotonic growth
increase up to recent times that appears to emerge from the background after about 1880.
That this tree-ring record can be interpreted as an index of summer temperature change
over Bhutan is demonstrated by its correlation with gridded summer temperatures shown
in Figure 2.10. This map shows the locations of significant correlations between the
Bhutan spruce tree rings and mean monthly temperature data for the period 1901 to 2003.
The greatest concentration of significant correlations is exactly over the Himalayas of
Bhutan where the tree-ring data are located. The peak correlations over Bhutan (~0.50)
are somewhat modest from the perspective of explained variance (~25 percent) between
tree rings and summer temperatures, but the gridded temperature data used here is based
solely on interpolated data from surrounding Indian meteorological stations. The climate
records from Bhutan are extremely short (~10 to 20 years long) and insufficient for this
kind of analysis. Therefore, the results presented here are likely to be a minimum
estimate of how strongly the tree-ring record in Figure 2.10 is reflecting changes in
current and past summer temperatures over Bhutan. Thus, the glacier retreat now
underway in Bhutan (Bajracharya et al., 2007) appears to be associated with
unprecedented summer warming over this part of the Himalayas.
Finally, over the Tibetan Plateau on the drier side of the Himalayas there is less
clear and somewhat conflicting evidence for climate warming since the LIA. In
southwest Tibet, Yang et al. (2009) produced evidence for a modest summer warming
that appeared to increase in strength towards the end of the 20th century. In contrast, a
January to June temperature reconstruction from southeast Tibet produced by Yang et al.
(2010) showed modest cooling. Comparisons made to other tree-ring reconstructions
(e.g., Bräuning and Mantwill, 2004; Fan et al., 2008a; Li et al., 2011; Liang et al., 2008;
Liang et al., 2009) from the Tibetan Plateau also yield conflicting evidence for wide
spread climate warming in the 20th century. This may be due to variations in the seasonal
response of the trees to temperature, as previously suggested in the western Indian
Himalayas, and also due to variations in site characteristics that could possibly affect
moisture availability in this dry region.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

46

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

FIGURE 2.12 The “All Bhutan” Picea spinulosa tree-ring chronology (1400-2005). The
sample size (cores) per year is also shown, along with the chronology range above the
dashed line where the Expressed Population Signal (EPS) and sample size (N) are
sufficient to produce a statistically valid tree-ring chronology (1450-2003 here) for
climate modeling and interpretation (Wigley et al., 1984). The data indicate a pronounced
below-average growth period from 1590 to 1820 in the data, interpreted here as the Little
Ice Age in Bhutan, followed by a steady growth increase that indicates a substantial
summer season warming trend since 1700. SOURCE: Cook and Krusic (2011).
Precipitation – Monsoon and Winter Snowfall
Reconstructions of past precipitation (and related hydrologic variability) from tree rings
in the HKH are less common than for temperature. However, there have been some
notable successes that generally show a trend towards anomalously wetter conditions in
the 20th century in the western portion of the HKH compared to earlier times. In the
Karakoram of northern Pakistan, Treydte et al. (2006) measured stable oxygen isotope
ratios in the annual rings of ancient Junipers and showed that the 20th century has been
the wettest period of the past millennium there. A bit farther eastward in the western
Indian Himalayas, Singh and Yadav (2005), Singh et al. (2006; 2009), and Yadav (2011)
all show that the latter half of the 20th century has been the wettest period since at least
the LIA. In comparison, precipitation reconstructions for the eastern Tibetan Plateau
(e.g., Fan et al., 2008b; Liu, J. et al., 2011) show a more mixed record of inter-decadal
wetness and dryness, with a tendency for drier conditions in the last half of the 20th
century followed by somewhat wetter conditions since that time.
Overall, the tree-ring climate reconstructions indicate that climate has been
getting warmer and wetter since the LIA over significant portions of the HKH, but the
story is regionally and seasonally complex with not all locations or seasons agreeing in
the direction or size of the change. In the drier western part of the HKH there is
reasonably consistent evidence from tree rings for a warming trend in winter
temperatures since the LIA, with the 20th century often being the warmest period overall.
However, this warming trend does not appear to extend into the spring season. Instead,
spring temperatures have generally declined there since the mid-20th century based on
tree-ring evidence. The western Himalayas and Karakoram also appear to be getting
wetter now compared to the past. This is consistent with the current stable or surging
state of glaciers in the Karakoram (Bolch et al., 2012). In the eastern Himalayas of
Bhutan, dramatic summer warming has been underway there since the LIA, which does
not show any signs of slowing down. This is consistent with the glacier retreat now
PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

47

FIGURE 2.13 Mean summer (June-July-August) temperature correlations in the Bhutan
region (p<0.10) with the “All Bhutan” Picea spinulosa tree-ring chronology shown in
Figure 2.9. Correlations are calculated over the 1901-2003 period. The positive
correlations indicate that the tree ring data shown in Figure 2.9 can be interpreted as an
index of summer temperature change over Bhutan. SOURCE: produced with KNMI
Climate Explorer using CRU TS 3.1 gridded mean temperature data.
underway there (Bajracharya et al., 2007). On the Tibetan Plateau, changes in
temperature and precipitation indicated by tree rings are mixed, with a tendency for drier
conditions in the last half of the 20th century followed by somewhat wetter conditions
since that time.
The general tendency for warmer and wetter conditions over large parts of the
HKH can affect the glaciers in different ways, depending on whether temperature or
precipitation is more important to the mass balance. In the western HKH where moisture
delivered by the mid-latitude westerlies is most important, glacier mass balance appears
to be reasonably stable because winter snowfall accumulation is presently sufficient to
offset any climate warming during the summer ablation season. Whether or not this
stability continues will depend at least in part on the continued delivery of sufficient
snowfall to offset any future increases in ablation due to summer warming, a great
unknown at this time. However, if the past is any indication, the present period of unusual
above average wetness may be hard to increase enough to offset the effects of future
warming. In the summer monsoon dominated eastern Himalayas, it appears that ablation
is already outpacing accumulation based on glacial retreat in areas like Bhutan, where

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

48

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

20th century summer temperatures appear to be warmer than at any time since 1450. It is
hard to imagine how this trend might be reversed in the future because of the way
temperatures are expected to continue to rise due to greenhouse warming.
Ice Cores
One of the critical functions that mountain glaciers serve is the preservation of
detailed information about past climate and the ability of glaciers to respond to different
climate variables. Currently, there are five long ice core records (greater than 2,000
years) for the HKH region. Three are from the Tibetan Plateau, and only two are from the
Himalayas. As discussed in the previous section, the climate of the region varies a great
deal from east to west, and to some extent from north to south. Therefore more ice core
data is needed to form a complete picture of the region’s paleoclimate. However,
information from the five long ice core records that do exist, much like tree ring data,
demonstrate the climatic complexity and diversity of the HKH region.
Proxy climate records spanning more than 500,000 years have been recovered
from the Guliya ice cap in the far northwestern Kunlun Mountain region of the Tibetan
Plateau, dominated by westerly air flow over the Eurasian land mass, while shorter
records (<10,000 years) have been recovered from ice fields in the central Himalaya to
the south, where a monsoonal climate regime dominates and the annual accumulation is
high. These records show that the Himalayan ice fields are sensitive to fluctuations of the
South Asian monsoon, and are affected by rising temperature in the region.
Over the past 25 years the Ice Core Paleoclimate Research Group at the Byrd
Polar Research Center has collected ice cores from five sites across the Tibetan Plateau.
Figure 2.11 shows the location of these 5 drill sites. Naimona’nyi (6,050 m a.s.l.) is
included even though recent melting at the glacier surface has removed the upper 40 to
50 years of the record (Kehrwald et al., 2008). The decadal δ18O and dust data along with
a 3-year moving average is illustrated in Figure 2.12. The data illustrate the effect of the
recent warming across the Plateau on the mean δ18O values since 1950. There is a strong
enrichment of 18O that is enhanced with altitude. The average values of δ18O from 1000
to 1950 are -10.85‰ for Dunde (5,325 m a.s.l.), -15.01‰ for Purguogangri (6,070 m
a.s.l.), -14.28‰ for Guliya (6,200 m a.s.l.) and -20.48‰ for Dasuopu (7,200 m a.s.l.).
From 1950 to the top of these records (except for Naimona’nyi where the most recent
part of the record is missing) the δ18O averages have increased by 0.71‰, 1.35‰, 1.08‰
and 2.63‰ for Dunde, Puruogangri, Guliya and Dasuopu, respectively. These trends are
consistent with instrumental temperature records since the 1950s across the Plateau (Liu,
X. and Chen, 2000) as well as with the model predictions of the vertical amplification of
temperature across the region.
The mineral dust record for the same periods in these five cores shows a great
deal of site to site variability as dust is often more of a local to regional signal. The only
record which shows an increase in concentrations in the 20th century is the 7,200 m a.s.l.
Dasuopu record. There is a very large difference in dust concentrations from region to
region. The Dunde and Guliya ice cores located on the most northeastern and
northwestern areas of Tibetan Plateau contain 20 times higher dust concentration than
that of the most southern ice core study site, Dasuopu, at the top of the Himalaya. The

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

49

FIGURE 2.14 Location of the five ice core study sites in the Himalaya and across the
Tibetan Plateau.
larger concentration of dust in cores in the north is due in part to the proximity to Takla
Makan and Gobi deserts and the fact that they are located in regions of the Plateau that
are dominated by the westerlies. Puruogangri, Naimona’nyi and Dasuopu located in the
central Tibetan Plateau and the Himalayas to the south are under greater influence of the
monsoons and contain far lower concentrations of mineral dust. The lowest mineral dust
concentrations are found in the 7,200 m a.s.l Dasuopu ice core study site. The ice core
data files along with the metadata files for Dunde, Guliya, Dasuopu and Puruogangri ice
cores are archived at the National Climatic Data Center (NCDC)8. Naimona’nyi ice core
data files and metadata will be archived pending publication.
A high-resolution ice core record from Dasuopu at 7,200 m in the central Himalaya
(located just north of the China-Nepal border) shows that this location responds to
fluctuations in the intensity of the South Asian monsoon. Measurements of dust and
chloride concentrations yield information about changes in monsoonal intensity. Older
sections of the ice cores reveal periods of drought in the region, with the drought of
greatest intensity occurring from 1790 to 1796. Recent increases in anthropogenic
8

http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/paleo/icecore.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

50

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

FIGURE 2.15 One thousand year records of δ18O and mineral dust concentrations, shown
as decadal averages, from five Tibetan Plateau ice core study sites along with a threedecade moving average.
activity in India and Nepal are shown by a doubling of chloride concentrations and a
fourfold increase in dust in the upper sections of these cores. The Dasuopu ice core also
suggests a 20th-century warming trend that appears to be amplified at higher elevations
(Thompson et al., 2000).
The ice fields located in more arid regions of the Tibetan Plateau (i.e., Guliya,
Puruogangri, Dunde) have rather similar annual net mass balances, averaging 220 mm
water equivalent (liquid water obtained from melting snow or ice) per year for Guliya in
the far northwestern Tibetan Plateau, 350 mm water equivalent per year for Puruogangri
in central Tibetan Plateau and 390 mm water equivalent for Dunde in northeastern
Tibetan Plateau. Ice core records from these three ice fields have rather similar histories
with net balance higher in the 17th and 18th centuries, consistently lower values in the
19th century, and a general increase in the 20th century. In contrast, the net balance
history on Dasuopu in southern Tibetan Plateau in the Himalayas shows a different
pattern with current net balances averaging 1000 mm of water eq. per year. The net
balance history shows consistently high values over the 19th century. Although the 600year net balance history for the Himalayas (e.g., Dasuopu) is quite different from that in
the Tibetan Plateau to the north, their oxygen isotopic histories, or proxy temperature
records, are remarkably similar at lower frequencies. During the 17th century
temperatures were warmer over Guliya and Puruogangri than over Dunde and Dasuopu,
but there has been persistent, gradual warming from the 18th through the early 20th
century and accelerated warming over the second half of the 20th century. The recent
PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

51

isotopic enrichment is consistent among the Tibetan Plateau sites and independent of the
net balance (Duan et al., 2006; Thompson et al., 2006).
A sulfate record, which indicates deposition of sulfate aerosol, for 1000 to 1997
from the Dasuopu ice core shows that this site is sensitive to anthropogenic activity
originating in southern Asia. Before 1870 sulfate concentrations in the atmosphere were
relatively low and constant, but after 1870 concentrations increased and the rate of
increase has accelerated since 1930. This trend in sulfate deposition is accompanied by
growing SO2 emissions in South Asia. This is in contrast to sulfate concentrations derived
from Greenland ice cores, which have declined since the 1970s. This is a result of
regional differences between Europe and Asia in emission and transport of sulfate, as
well as different levels of environmental regulation (Duan et al., 2007). As discussed
earlier in this chapter, a number of recent studies have concentrated on the impact of
black carbon and aerosols on atmospheric heating and glacier melting (Lau et al., 2010;
Menon et al., 2010; Ramanathan and Carmichael, 2008).
Regional composites for the Tibetan Plateau have been constructed using decadal
averages of oxygen isotopes over the last 2,000 years to reveal larger temporal scale
changes. The 2,000-year perspective from these Tibetan Plateau ice cores shows large
and unusual warming at high elevations. The oxygen isotopic record clearly shows that
large-scale dynamics have changed over the past century, regardless of whether the
record is used as a proxy for temperature, precipitation, or atmospheric circulation
(Thompson and Davis, 2005; Thompson et al., 2006; Vuille et al., 2005; Yao, T. et al.,
1996). Similar to tree ring chronologies, ice core records collected across the Tibetan
Plateau demonstrate that it is a climatically diverse and complex region. Ice core data sets
from exposed mountain summits away from the effects of urbanization and topographic
sheltering provide relatively unbiased records of the planet’s climate.
REGIONAL HYDROLOGY
Mountains are the water towers of the world, characterized by high precipitation
and little evaporation due to lower air temperatures and longer snow coverage, resulting
in large contributions of snow and ice melt to the runoff of lowland areas (Viviroli et al.,
2007). This is especially true for the HKH region, where the snow and ice stored in highaltitude glaciers in the Greater Himalaya are a source of water for almost every major
river system in the region. However, a complete understanding of the regional
hydrology—including the actual contribution of snow and glacial meltwater to surface
waters and groundwater—of the region is lacking due to the same incomplete science and
unresolved uncertainties discussed earlier in the report.
The lack of understanding of the regional hydrology is intimately tied to water
security concerns in the region. Some reports and peer-reviewed publications suggest that
glacial meltwater provides a large share of the water feeding discharge in major rivers
such as the Ganges. This apparent contribution of glacial meltwater to these large rivers,
combined with the misconception that the region’s glaciers are experiencing the highest
rates of glacial retreat in the world, have combined to create a sense of water scarcity in
the region (e.g., Kehrwald et al., 2008).

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

52

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Uncertainty about the Contribution of Glacial Melt
to the Hydrology of the Region
Barnett et al. (2005) report that “there is little doubt that melting glaciers provide
a key source of water for the region in the summer months: as much as 70 percent of the
summer flow in the Ganges and 50 to 60 percent of the flow in other major rivers.” This
statement is based on estimates of glacial melt contributions to river flow derived from
models that relied on many assumptions, because of the lack of field data (Singh, P. and
Bengtsson, 2004; Singh, P. and Jain, 2002; Singh, P. et al., 1997). Rees and Collins
(2006) used a theoretical modeling approach to conclude that for large distances
downstream, the contribution of discharge from glacier ice melt often dominates flow
particularly when other sources of runoff are limited. (Rees and Collins, 2006).
Attempts to improve the understanding of the contribution of glacial wastage to
the regional hydrology confound these interpretations by identifying scientific gaps,
important nuances in geography, and contrasting results when using different scientific
methods. For example, modeling9 showed that in Nepal the glacier meltwater
contribution to tributaries to the Ganges near the base of the Himalayas sub-basin
streamflow varies from approximately 20 percent in the Budhi Gandaki basin to
approximately 2 percent in the Likhu Khola basin. The average across nine basins in
Nepal was 10 percent (Alford et al., 2010), a far lower percent than that discussed above.
Using remote sensing approaches,10 Racoviteanu (2011) corroborated these lower values
by showing that for the Langtang basin in Nepal, glacial meltwater contributes about 10
percent of discharge at an elevation of 900 meters. This work also showed that the
contribution of glacial meltwater to discharge increases with increasing elevation,
reaching about 50 to 70 percent at an elevation of 3,800 m (Racoviteanu, 2011). Using
ice core records and measuring radioactivity, Kehrwald et al. (2008) suggested that
reports of the relationship between glacier retreat and downstream water resources have
not accounted for mass loss through thinning of high elevation, low latitude glaciers. For
example, this is apparently occurring in the Naimona’nyi glacier in Tibet. Thinning of
high elevation glaciers could result in a decrease in water availability in regions where
the water supply is dominated by high elevation glacial melt. Armstrong (2010) reported
that previous assessments of the relationship between glacier meltwater and surface water
supply have been highly qualitative or local in scale. Direct evidence is lacking to support
the higher end values reported for the contribution of glacier ice melt to total river flow
volume (i.e., 50, 60, 70 percent). However, it is generally accepted that the percent
contribution increases from east to west across the region (Immerzeel et al., 2010).
Finally, contributing to the confusion about the relative importance of glacial melt
to the discharge of rivers is the often overlooked differentiation between relative
contributions of snowmelt versus glacial melt. For example, any water source from high
elevation is sometimes assumed to be glacial melt, when in fact snowmelt may be a major
contributor. Snowmelt is a renewable resource that is replenished every year, in contrast
9

The model was based on limited mass balance measurements from glaciers in the region, remote sensing
measurements of glacier area, and a variety of assumptions.
10
Datasets were derived using remote sensing resources discussed further in Appendix A, such as the
Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) sensor, declassified Corona
imagery, and Landsat ETM+.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

53

to the fossil water11 contributed by glacier wastage (Barnett et al., 2005). In addition,
some reported values include runoff from rain and other forms of precipitation that would
occur with or without the presence of glacial ice. In most basins, the contribution of rain
far outweighs the combined contributions of snowmelt and glacier wastage to discharge.
For example, Andermann et al. (2012) found that snowmelt and glacier melt contributed
roughly 10 percent to the discharge of the three main Nepal rivers. Therefore, in these
catchments, rainfall could contribute as much as 90 percent to the total discharge.
A Complex Hydroclimatic System
Glaciers are only one part of the complex HKH hydroclimatic system12, where the
relative importance of the contribution of glacial meltwater to runoff depends on the
magnitude of other components of the hydrologic cycle. The different climate regimes of
the region are characterized by differences in the spatial and temporal distribution of
precipitation (type and amount) and runoff. As mentioned previously, summer monsoon
rains dominate the annual precipitation cycle of the eastern Himalayas while the west is
dominated by winter snowfall with low amounts of summer precipitation. A similar
variation in the relative contributions of rain, snowmelt, and melt of glacier ice to the
discharge of different rivers throughout the HKH is expected.
Methods comparing measurements or models of glacier meltwater production
with measurements of downstream discharge volume are problematic. Glacier meltwater
can be interpreted as raw volume input into the system, but downstream of the glaciers
discharge has been modified by a number of factors, including precipitation, evaporation,
irrigation, damming, and groundwater exchange. With increasing distance from the
glaciers, these modifications increase in relative importance, while the relative
contribution of glacier meltwater decreases. In a direct comparison between glacier
meltwater and runoff downriver, the volume contribution from glaciers can be
overestimated with increasing distance from the glaciers (Kaser et al., 2010).
Furthermore, limited data on the water cycle of the region, due to a variety of
reasons ranging from difficult terrain to political instability, is a chronic problem.
Scientists compensate by using many assumptions in models or remote sensing imagery.
The overall result, however, is more overall uncertainty in the body of scientific literature
than in other parts of the world that are not limited by these challenges. Despite this
uncertainty, many studies have contributed to reducing this uncertainty associated with
the complexity of the HKH hydroclimatic system.
There is strong seasonality in annual precipitation. Annual hydrographs for the
Ganges and Indus Rivers clearly show strong seasonality in the amount of discharge,
leading to seasonal differences in water availability. The Ganges River exhibits a
significant discharge during the summer months resulting in a water surplus that can
maintain in stream flows and in some areas recharge groundwater storage. However,
water consumption exceeds natural run-off in the winter months of February and March
11

Fossil water is water that has been stored in a glacier or an aquifer for a long (years or more) period of
time.
12
The hydroclimatic system includes the processes by which the climate system causes global and local
variations in the hydrologic cycle.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

54

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

when there is some reliance on groundwater and/or storage (Hoekstra and Mekonnen,
2011). The Indus River has a lower peak discharge and lower annual discharge than the
Ganges River. The Indus River discharge also varies seasonally and interannually. (The
relationship between natural run-off and water use in the major river basins in the study
region is discussed in more detail in Chapter 3.)
Using a modeling approach, Immerzeel et al. (2010) concluded that glacier and
snow melt is “extremely important in the Indus Basin and important for the Brahmaputra
basin, but plays only a modest role for the Ganges, Yangtze, and Yellow rivers.”
Preliminary results show that in the Indus, snow and glacier melt contribute one and a
half times as much discharge as that generated naturally downstream below 2,000 m. In
the Brahmaputra, snow and ice discharge is about a quarter of that generated
downstream. The model found snow and glacier melt to be less important in the Ganges,
with discharge being about one tenth of that generated downstream. For the Indus, this
indicates that the source of much of the streamflow at low elevations is snow and/or ice
melt from elevations greater than 2,000 m. The values for the Ganges are remarkably
similar to those of Alford et al. (2010) and suggest that glacial melt is not a major
contributor for river systems to the east but is much more important for river systems to
the west.
Recently, Wulf et al. (2011) quantified the water resources and discharge
components for the Sutlej River from 2004 to 2009, which is a major tributary of the
Indus River flowing through northern India and Pakistan. As discussed earlier in this
Chapter, the Sutlej basin is located at the interface between the monsoon dominated
precipitation regime to the east and the winter snow dominated regime to the west.
Results indicate that the discharge of the Sutlej River at Bhakra located at low elevation
situated at the base of the mountains is sourced predominately by snow melt (48 percent)
followed by effective rainfall (rainfall-evapotranspiration13; 39 percent) and glacial melt
(13 percent). Average runoff per square-meter is less than 0.2 m yr-1 in the high-elevated,
low relief Transhimalayan part of the Sutlej Valley, peaks at about 1.5 m yr-1 in the
snowmelt dominated High Himalaya, and is about 0.9 m yr-1 at the rainfall dominated
mountain front. Snowmelt is thus a much more important component of discharge than
glacier melt for the Sutlej basin, where monsoon rains are less important than further to
the east in Nepal and Bhutan.
The hydrograph of the upper Indus Basin is highly seasonal, with about 85
percent of annual discharge occurring between May and September. Figure 2.16 shows
the times series of monthly and yearly variability in May to September discharge at the
historic Partab Bridge, Pakistan, for the period 1962 to 2008. Median discharge is 3,658
m3 s-1, but has the appearance of two flow regimes: 3,519 m3 s-1 from 1962 to 1987 and
3,902 m3 s-1 from 1988 to 2008, an approximate 11 percent increase. These two periods
are reasonably consistent with periods of observed glacier retreat in 1985 to 1995 and
expansion in 1997 to 2002 in the Karakoram (Hewitt, 2005). The upper Indus Basin
record at Partab Bridge is too short to determine whether these are indicative of long-term
trends or shorter random changes at the decadal scale, hence the value of producing a
much longer May to September river flow reconstruction from tree rings (Ahmed and
Cook, 2011). However, the results do indicate that recent measurements of increased
13

Evapotranspiration is the combined processes through which water is transferred to the atmosphere from
open water and ice surfaces, bare soil, and vegetation (AMS, 2000).

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

55

Upper Indus Monthly Hydrograph At Partab Bridge
8000
7000

Discharge (CMS)

6000
5000

May-Sep
discharge
totals 85%
of annual
discharge

4000
3000
2000
1000
0
Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Month

May-September Total Discharge At Partab Bridge
26000

Discharge (CMS)

24000
22000

20000
18000

16000
14000

12000
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year

FIGURE 2.16 The monthly hydrograph of upper Indus River discharge at Partab Bridge,
Pakistan, for the period 1962 to 2008 (top) and the cumulative discharge series for the
May to September months (bottom) that collectively account for about 85 percent of the
annual discharge on average. In both the top and bottom, the discharge on the y-axis is in
units of cubic meters per second (m3 s-1), or CMS. The red curve is a 50 percent
LOWESS robust smooth of the yearly discharge data. The annual discharge has the
appearance of two flow regimes: about 3,500 m3 s-1 from 1962 to 1987 and about 3,900
m3 s-1 from 1988 to 2008, an approximate 11 percent increase. This is reasonably
consistent with periods of observed glacier recession from 1985 to 1995 and expansion
from 1997 to 2002 in the Karakoram.
snowfall in the area and positive glacial mass balances are correlated with recent
increases in discharge. Furthermore, the sub-basins and tributaries of the Upper Indus
Basin are not always in-phase with respect to their relative contributions to the overall
discharge. Fowler and Archer (2006) report conflicting signals of temperature and
discharge in tributary inflows that ultimately discharge into the Tarbela Reservoir, further
downstream on the Indus Basin. In summary, if the observed +11 percent change is a
short term phenomenon, it falls within the interannual variability of flows and is of little
import for water supply; if it indicates a long-term step increase in discharge, +11 percent
over five months represents approximately 4 million acre-feet, which would be
PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

56

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

significant for downstream mountain communities and also for downstream reservoir
operation, storage, and deliveries. But again, the period of record is too short to speculate
about the trend, driving forces, or water resources significant of this record at present.
The Role of Groundwater
Groundwater is an important part of the hydrologic system in any part of the
world. It is the primary source of freshwater in many areas around the world and
responds more slowly to meteorological conditions when compared to the surface
components of the water cycle. The full role of groundwater in the HKH region is not
clearly understood. For example, the amount of groundwater storage in the HKH region
is largely unknown because storage is notoriously difficult to measure, especially in
mountainous terrain. Furthermore, the relationship between glacier and snowmelt and
groundwater recharge is not fully understood. Understanding the average spatial and
temporal characteristics of groundwater fluxes, recharge, and discharge, is a research
frontier facing the hydrologic science community (NRC, 2012a) and the HKH region is
no exception; the mechanisms and pathways of groundwater recharge and discharge
remain unclear.
There is no evidence that glacial melt or wastage contributes to groundwater
recharge outside of local regions in any significant way. Research from other
mountainous regions has shown that groundwater recharge outside of local impacts is
negligible and there are no circumstances that hint that this would not be so in the HKH.
The effect of glacial melt on groundwater recharge on the plains is likely small because
the contribution of glacial meltwater to flows downstream is generally small and
therefore any groundwater recharge from major rivers downstream would be little
affected by changes in flows of glacial meltwater. This is important because there is
substantial evidence that groundwater withdrawals are increasing and it appears unlikely
that increases in glacier wastage would have any significant impact on the supplies of
groundwater available to meet the increased demands.
Groundwater extraction across northern India and the surrounding area in
response to the growing demand for water14 is exceeding groundwater recharge, causing
a lowering of the water table (Qureshi, 2003; Shah, 2009; Sikka and Gichuki, 2006). The
Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE)15 satellite mission revealed a
steady mass loss that has been proposed to be due to this excessive groundwater
extraction (Rodell et al., 2009; Tiwari et al., 2009). Tiwari et al. (2009) estimate the
region lost groundwater at a rate of 54 ± 9 km3 yr-1 between 2002 and 2008, which is
likely the largest rate of groundwater loss for comparably-sized regions. A more recent
analysis of the loss of groundwater storage in this area using GRACE data by Moiwo
(2011) shows a similar depletion. If this trend is sustained, there could be water shortages
in the region when the aquifers become economically exhausted (Tiwari et al., 2009).
More specifically, it is possible that groundwater withdrawals during the low-flow period
of these river basins may cause these rivers to become seasonally dry. Finally, advances
14

Groundwater accounts for 45 to 50 percent of irrigation and 50 to 80 percent of domestic water
use.(Rodell et al., 2009)
15
See http://www.csr.utexas.edu/grace/
PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

57

from satellite gravimetry in the GRACE mission have helped to quantify groundwater
depletion in the plains of northwest India, but the spatiotemporal resolution of the current
satellite system is too coarse to fully distinguish between all mass changing processes
(groundwater, ice melt, sediment, and tectonic forces; (Bookhagen, 2012).
Mountain runoff (recharge) from the Himalayas towards low elevation areas, in
other words the mountain water tower effect, appears to be a significant source of
recharge to Northern India. A simple but effective hydrological model combined with
daily rainfall and discharge measurements found that groundwater flow through bedrock
is approximately six times the annual contribution from glacier and snowmelt to central
Himalayan rivers (Andermann et al., 2012). Nevertheless, this hydrologic model used by
Andermann and colleagues only accounts for snowmelt waters and not for the melting of
glacial ice, which is likely to be an important discharge contribution during the late
summer. Furthermore, with a model based on mean monthly values, it is difficult to
establish the infiltration behavior of relatively short, but strong, monsoon storms
(Bookhagen, 2012).
Groundwater storage in the middle and upper Indus River plains of Pakistan is
also significant, and it has been increasingly pumped to fulfill agricultural and urban
water demands. This is consistent with the decrease in discharge (discussed above) below
the Partab Bridge over the last 10 years. However, groundwater in this region is
recharged by the distribution of upper Indus basin runoff through Pakistan’s extensive
canal irrigation system across the Indus plains, mitigating groundwater depletion. But in
some areas the canal system contributes to waterlogging, a high water table resulting in
the saturation of soil to the degree of hindering or preventing agriculture (Briscoe and
Qamar, 2006). Salinization of waterlogged lands soon follows.
These groundwater balance processes are difficult to estimate, however, as they
involve water level fluctuations over the year, as well as high levels of spatial variation in
depths to groundwater and salinity levels (Van Steenbergen and Gohar, 2005).
Waterlogging and salinity issues increase with the successive reuses of water downstream
in the canals of the lower Indus basin (Bhutta, M. N. and Smedema, 2005). Again, the
signal of the contribution of glacial meltwater in the downstream hydrologic cycle can be
lost in the noise of other processes, such as irrigation and the resulting hydrologic
impacts.
In contrast to northern India and Pakistan, groundwater resources in the Kabul
Basin of Afghanistan appear to be adequate for current needs and for at least the next
several decades. A quantitative study of groundwater resources in the Kabul Basin (a
very arid region), Afghanistan by the U.S. Geological Survey and Afghanistan authorities
(Mack et al., 2010),16 has shed light on the role of groundwater in this country. This study
integrated a variety of hydrologic datasets—for example, streamflow data, water quality
data, and satellite imagery—into a groundwater flow model to assess current and future
water availability in the region.
The study gleaned that groundwater from the upper aquifers has been the primary
source of water for agriculture and municipalities (Mack et al., 2010). The availability of
groundwater in the Kabul Basin primarily depends on: (a) surface-water infiltration from
16

The study was conducted by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), under an agreement funded by the
United States Agency for International Development (USAID). It was conducted with cooperation from the
Afghanistan Geological Survey (AGS) and the Afghanistan Ministry of Energy and Water (MEW).

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

58

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

rivers and streams, (b) water leakage from irrigated areas, (c) subsurface groundwater
inflows from mountain fronts and, (d) groundwater storage in thick sediments. However,
most recharge is derived from leakage of streamflow. Snowmelt in the mountains
surrounding Kabul Basin, particularly the Paghman Mountains, contribute an unknown
but important amount to the water resources of the basin (Mack et al., 2010).
Groundwater resources in the upper aquifer during years of normal precipitation
and in the northern Kabul Basin are considerable. Existing community water-supply
wells that are shallow, or screened near the water table, likely would be affected by
increased groundwater withdrawals, however, and could be rendered inoperable or dry
during summer months with groundwater-level declines as small as about 1 m.
Simulations of the effects of increasing water use on groundwater levels indicate that a
large percentage of existing shallow water-supply wells in urban areas may contain little
or no water by 2057 (Mack et al., 2010).
Possible Changes in Regional Hydrology
The analysis of future climate change impacts on the hydrology of the HKH
region is complex because of climate variability, sparse data, and uncertainties in climate
projections and the response of glaciers to current and future changes in climate, as
discussed earlier in this Chapter.
Immerzeel et al. (2012) evaluated the hydrologic response to future changes in
climate for the Langtang basin in Nepal using a high-resolution combined cryospherichydrological model that explicitly simulates glacier evolution and all major hydrological
processes. The analysis showed that both temperature and precipitation are projected to
increase over the next century. These increases will lead to greater evapotranspiration and
higher snow and ice melt. This combined with more snow falling as rain, results in a
steady decline of the glacier area in the model. Furthermore, the analysis shows that
increased precipitation and ice melt will lead to increased streamflow. The seasonal peak
in melt water coincides with the monsoon peak, therefore no shifts in the hydrograph are
expected.
If these results are representative of the region, the Committee expects little
change in the hydrograph of large rivers in the HKH region in response to changes in
climate and potential glacial retreat over the next several decades. If anything, there may
be an increase in discharge. Potential changes in climate that result in drier and/or
warmer conditions will result in negative glacial mass balances, providing an additional
water source for these large rivers over the next several decades. Decreases in available
water from changes in climate (less precipitation, more evapotranspiration, etc.) will be
compensated by the release of water from storage in glaciers. However, higher elevation
areas can receive more than 50 percent of their annual water flow from glacial meltwater.
Populations that live in high-elevation areas—or use them for activities such as seasonal
grazing—may face water shortages in the near future (years to decades) if their basins
have glaciers where the upper end of the glacier is at or near the elevation of the local
ELA.
There is the possibility of reduced availability of groundwater below the front of
the HKH, for example the Gangetic plain in northern India. Andermann et al. (2012) have

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

59

recently shown that groundwater storage in the fractured bedrock influences significantly
the Himalayan river discharge cycle for the Ganges River Basin. They show that water
from rainfall and snowmelt is stored temporarily in a groundwater reservoir with a
characteristic response time of about 45 days. Further, they suggest that water traveling
through groundwater reservoirs in the eastern HKH represents about two-thirds of annual
discharge. Groundwater is the primary source of water during low-flow times such as
winter months, where consumptive use of water in the Ganges basin is already greater
than flow. The short response time and large amount of water flowing through the
groundwater systems, in combination with the GRACE measurements that suggest a
rapid reduction in the amount of groundwater in northern India, are consistent with a
system that is experiencing overdrafting of groundwater. Current recharge rates do not
appear to be able to replenish present rates of groundwater removal. Continued or
accelerated rates of groundwater removal can easily lead to water shortages on the scale
of years.
The largest changes to the hydrologic system over the next decade or two will
most likely be because of changes in the timing, location, and intensity of monsoonal
activity. Interannual variability of the monsoon strongly affects spatial patterns. At some
locations in the central Himalayas, one monsoon depression alone can account for 10 to
20 percent of all monsoon rainfall. A small shift in storm path from one year to another
can cause large differences in water availability. An example is the flooding in Pakistan
in July and August 2010 that resulted from an unusual combination of severe weather
events (Lau and Kim, 2011a). The 2010 Pakistan flood caused historic social and
economic losses for the country. The flooding was primarily due to heavy rain that fell
during late July and early August 2010, from a shift of monsoon activities from the Bay
of Bengal to northern Pakistan. Glacier wastage from the Himalayas likely did not play a
role in this case.
While flow in the Indus and the Ganges/Brahmaputra Basins will be highly
affected by changes in precipitation, climate change will also have other impacts on the
hydrologic cycle. For instance, evapotranspiration rates may increase over large parts of
the irrigated area of both basins. To compensate, farmers may apply more irrigation
water, further drawing down surface water and groundwater. This trend may be most
important during the dry months of the year, and may be most significant on the Indus
River, which already has dry periods when available flow does not meet demand for
irrigation water.
PHYSICAL EXTREME EVENTS
As discussed in Chapter 1, lack of observational data in the HKH region has led to
misunderstandings about the effects of climate change on glacier retreat rates. One such
misunderstanding is that retreating glaciers will lead to widespread flooding. While this is
not likely, the region does face other physical hazards, including flash flooding due to
extreme precipitation, flooding due to monsoon rainfall, lake outbursts, landslides, and
avalanches. Monsoon flooding and lake outbursts are covered in detail here.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

60

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Monsoon Flooding
Monsoon flooding can cause loss of life and property, and potentially economic
and social calamities. During the historic flooding in Bangladesh in 1998, two-thirds of
the country was submerged; about one thousand people perished from flooding or
succumbed to waterborne diseases such as typhoid and cholera. Nearly 16,000 km of
roads and more than 700,000 hectares of cropland were damaged or destroyed, and over
one million people were displaced (BBC News, 1998; del Ninno et al., 2001).
Monsoon flooding can have important political impacts. Because of the enormous
cost involved in rebuilding businesses, agriculture, and infrastructure, a major monsoon
flood can have profound and long-term impacts on the policy and politics of the local and
national governments in the Himalaya region. The way governments respond, and how
they interact with international relief groups in managing the relief efforts, may also
contribute to public perception of inefficiency, favoritism, political discord, and unrest, as
in the case of the 2010 Pakistan flood. Another example is the 2008 flooding of the Kosi
River, which flows from the Himalaya foothills of Nepal to a confluence with the Ganges
in the Bihar region of northern India. The flood event led to a dispute between Nepal and
India regarding mismanagement of the Kosi River (Malhotra, 2010).
The main cause of monsoon floods is heavy rain. Monsoon floods occur most
frequently in the foothill regions along the arc of the Himalayas, and low-lying areas in
the head of the Bay of Bengal during the summer monsoon season from June through
September. The heavy monsoon rains range from Bangladesh, Bhutan, Nepal, and
northeastern India, to north and northwestern India and Pakistan. With few exceptions,
every year somewhere in the region, some degree of monsoon flooding will occur, due to
the uneven distribution of monsoon rain.
A number of additional factors have the potential to contribute to the severity of
monsoon floods by compounding the impact of heavy rains (NRC, 2012a). For example,
if the heavy rains are coupled with unusually high volumes of runoff from melting
snowpack in the Himalayas (especially rain-on-snow events), the result might be
devastating. Land use changes and deforestation could also affect the severity of
monsoon floods through an increase in surface water flow leading to more severe
flooding. Changes in the distribution of monsoon rainfall in response to climate and other
factors may bring heavy rain to relatively dry regions (e.g., the 2010 Pakistan flood),
where the local population may be less prepared or equipped to carry out prevention,
evacuation, and mitigation measures. While these scenarios are speculative, it is clear that
how hydrologic extremes (in this case, monsoon flooding) are intertwined with
anthropogenic effects is poorly understood (NRC, 2012a).
The monsoon varies with many factors, including air-sea interactions and land
processes. Increased aerosol concentrations may also influence the monsoon through
local heating. The severity of monsoon flooding also depends on the local topography
and infrastructure. While the magnitude of the heavy monsoon rain during the Pakistan
flood of 2010 was small compared with that of the 1988 Bangladesh flood, the impacts of
the flooding were equally devastating. One fifth of the country was underwater; nearly
2,000 people perished; 20 million people were affected. The direct damage caused by the
floods was estimated to be US$6.5 billion, with an additional US$3.6 billion in indirect
losses (Asian Development Bank and World Bank, 2010).

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

61

FIGURE 2.17 Schematic diagram of a moraine-dammed glacial lake formed by glacial
meltwater. Failure of the confining moraine dam leads to an outburst flood.
Outburst Floods
A Glacial Lake Outburst Flood (GLOF) is a type of flood that occurs when water
dammed by a glacier or a moraine is rapidly released by failure of the dam (e.g.,
Bajracharya et al., 2007; Hewitt, 1982; Xin et al., 2008). There are two distinctly
different forms of glacial lake outbursts: those that result from the collapse or
overtopping of ice dams formed by the glacier itself, and those that occur when water
drains rapidly from lakes formed either on the lower surface of glaciers (supra-glacial) or
between the end moraine and the terminus of a retreating glacier (moraine-dammed;
Figure 2.17). The phenomenon of ice-dammed lakes is more prevalent in the Karakoram
Mountains in northern Pakistan and the Pamirs. In the eastern Himalayas (e.g., Bhutan,
Nepal) GLOFs are generally caused by water draining rapidly from supra-glacial lakes or
the collapse of moraines. Failure of the confining dam can have a variety of causes,
including earthquakes, catastrophic failure of slopes into the lake (avalanches, rock
slides, ice fall from a glacier into the lake), a buildup of water pressure, or even simple
erosion of the confining dam over time.
An example of a potential threat from ice-dammed lakes is the Medvezhi Glacier
in the Pamir mountains. In 1963 and 1973, the surge of the glacier was large enough that
the ice dam exceeded 100 m in height, creating a lake of over 20 million m3 of water and
debris. A series of large floods resulted from the outburst of that lake, but there were no
victims because of monitoring and early warning systems. Infrastructural damage,
however, was significant (UNEP, 2007).
New glacial lake formation and the enlargement of existing lakes have resulted
from thinning and retreat of glaciers in the HKH region. Many glacial lakes in Nepal are

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

62

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

growing at a considerable rate, increasing the risk to local populations. 24 GLOF events
have occurred in Nepal in the recent past, causing considerable loss of life and property.
For example, the 1981 Sun Koshi GLOF damaged the only road link to China and
disrupted transportation for several months, and the 1985 Dig Tsho GLOF destroyed the
nearly completed Namche Small Hydroelectric Project, in addition to causing other
damage farther downstream (Bajracharya et al., 2007).
There is no doubt that people and property for considerable distances downstream
from the unstable lakes are facing a serious threat; the problem, however, is how to
determine the degree of probability of such an event. Analysis of the rapidly growing
worldwide literature, including field and theoretical knowledge, on the outburst of glacial
lakes, led a recent ICIMOD commission on GLOFs in Nepal to conclude that it is not
feasible to make a reliable prediction of a specific occurrence on the basis of existing
knowledge (ICIMOD, 2011a). As direct predictions cannot be made, a careful selection
of prioritized lakes needs to be monitored on a regular basis.
GLOFs are not the only outburst lake hazards in the HKH region. Another is the
Landslide Lake Outburst Flood (LLOF), which is a catastrophic release of impounded
water from behind a natural dam formed by a landslide. In the steep mountainous
Himalayas landslides are a common event, whether they are triggered by normal
weathering and erosion processes, extreme rainfall events, or earthquakes. The release
potential of water by LLOFs can exceed that for GLOFs (Hewitt, 1982). This is because
landslide dams can be very large. Dunning et al. (2006) describe a landslide dam that
formed in Bhutan in 2003 and subsequently impounded 4 to 7 × 106 m3 of water before
its failure in 2004. Landslide lakes can also occur at much lower elevations than glacial
meltwater lakes where they can impound runoff from larger upstream catchment areas
compared to the areas contributing to glacial meltwater lakes. Hewitt (1982) provides a
detailed history of outburst floods in the Karakoram including some massive LLOFs, and
Gupta and Shah (2008) present an example of a LLOF in the Satluj catchment in
Himachal Pradesh, India well below the termini of any glaciers above it.
Like GLOFs, LLOFs pose a serious hazard to people, property, and infrastructure
downstream from the landslide dams. However, compared to the large number of glacial
meltwater lakes forming today due to climate warming and glacial retreat, landslide lakes
are less commonly formed in the high Himalayas (e.g., Hewitt, 1982). Therefore, the risk
posed by future LLOFs is likely to be significantly less than that posed by GLOFs in the
HKH region. In the lower trans-Himalayan regions where landslide lakes replace
meltwater lakes as hazards (e.g., Gupta, V. and Sah, 2008), LLOFs will be a greater
future risk. That being said, the development of landslide lakes is almost certainly less
predictable than meltwater lakes because landslides are more random and where they will
occur is harder to predict compared to glacier retreats. Thus, LLOFs are even less
predictable than GLOFs.
CONCLUSIONS
Key features of the physical geography of the HKH region were identified at the
workshop by the breakout groups on Climate and Meteorology and on Hydrology, Water
Supply, Use, and Management. Starting from those concepts, the Committee used their

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Physical Geography

63

expert judgment, reviews of the literature, and deliberation to develop the following
conclusions:

















The climate of the Himalayas is not uniform and is strongly influenced by the
South Asian monsoon and the mid-latitude westerlies. Projecting impacts of
climate change in the Himalayas is challenging because of complex interactions
between global, regional, and local forcing and responses.
Evidence suggests that the eastern Himalayas and the Tibetan Plateau are
warming, and this trend is more pronounced at higher elevations. However, a lack
of sufficient paleoclimate data makes assessing the long-term significance of this
warming trend a challenge.
There is sparse historical climate data in the region, but scientists are fairly
confident about projections of future temperature increases. There is more
uncertainty in projections of amounts and timing of precipitation.
Aerosols from the combustion of fossil fuels, wood, and other sources are
increasing in the Indo-Gangetic Plain and the foothills of the Himalayas.
Absorbing aerosols such as desert dust and black carbon may contribute to the
rapid warming of the atmosphere, and model results indicate this may in turn
contribute to accelerated melting of snowpack and retreat of glaciers. Black
carbon deposited directly on non-debris-covered glaciers and snowpack could
increase the rate of retreat by reduction of surface albedo.
Over the next few decades, atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases are
projected to continue to increase globally, while black carbon aerosols are likely
to continue to increase in the Indo-Gangetic Plain and Himalayas. Unless these
trends are stabilized or reversed, the impacts of greenhouse gases and black
carbon on the rate of Himalayan glacier retreat will increase. That is, both the rate
and volume of the glacial retreat will be relatively greater than it would be
otherwise.
The rate of retreat and growth of individual glaciers is highly dependent on
glacier characteristics and location. The most vulnerable glaciers are small
glaciers at low elevation and with little debris cover. These characteristics also
make glaciers more susceptible to black carbon deposition, and model results
indicate black carbon deposition may make them more vulnerable to retreat.
In the eastern and central Himalayas there is evidence of glacier retreat with rates
accelerating over the past century. Retreat rates are comparable to other areas of
the world. Glaciers in the western Himalayas appear to be more stable overall,
with evidence that some may even be advancing.
In the short term, climate change is likely to increase glacier wastage. In the
longer term the impact of continued retreat of glaciers is not clear. The rate of
glacier retreat depends not only on temperature, but also on precipitation changes
associated with the summer monsoon in the central and eastern HKH, and the
winter westerlies in the western HKH. Black carbon aerosols, via atmospheric
heating and deposition on snowpack and glaciers, may increase the rate of glacier
wastage.
Surface water flow is highly seasonal and varies across the region, as does the
relative importance of glacial meltwater. In most instances, the annual
PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

64

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security














contribution of snowmelt and rainfall to streamflow exceeds that of glacier
wastage. Recent literature indicates the importance of the glacial contribution to
runoff has previously been overestimated.
The contribution of glacial wastage can be more important when the glacial
wastage acts as a buffer against hydrologic impacts brought about by a changing
climate. For example, in the late summer when all snow has melted and the
monsoon-rainfall contribution is declining or in the eastern HKH during times of
drought.
Although retreating glaciers will subsidize surface flow and mitigate immediate
losses to discharge by retreating glaciers, the loss of glacier “insurance” becomes
more problematic for flows in the upper reaches of the eastern HKH over the long
term.
In the western HKH where more of the surface water flow is from higher
elevations, the contribution of glacier wastage could be particularly important in
affecting the timing and volume of surface water discharge.
Overall, retreating glaciers over the next several decades are unlikely to cause
significant change in flows at lower elevations, which depend primarily on
monsoon rain. However, for high elevation areas, current glacier retreat rates, if
they continue, appear to be sufficient to alter the seasonal and temporal
streamflow in some basins. Removing water stored as glacial ice does not imply
any a priori effect on average annual discharge in the long term, assuming annual
precipitation remains the same. In the short-term with constant annual
precipitation, glacier wastage will augment the quantity of streamflow.
Limited streamflow data in upper basin regions, along with government
constraints on scientific access to international streamflow data, increase the
uncertainties surrounding hydrologic trends, variability, and extreme events in the
region. Limited streamflow data also limits the understanding of the relative
contributions of rain, snowmelt, and glacial meltwater, as well as groundwater
recharge mechanisms in the region.
Uncertainties in the role of groundwater in the overall hydrology of the region are
even greater than those of surface water. Current understanding of groundwater in
the region is confounded by a variety of limitations including: knowledge gaps
about the interaction between surface and groundwater; difficult terrain; the
fractured and variable nature of the underlying geological substrate; and the
inability to easily distinguish the contributions of snowmelt, glacial meltwater,
monsoonal precipitation, and human actions such as groundwater overdraft to
flows. Evidence suggests that sizable and extensive overdraft in the central
Ganges basin is likely to have an earlier and larger impact on water supplies than
foreseeable changes in glacial wastage.
For upstream populations, GLOFs and LLOFs are the dominant physical hazard
risk. For downstream populations in the central and eastern Himalayas, floods
from changes in monsoon rainfall and cyclones are more likely to be important,
along with changes in the timing of extreme events.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

3
Human Geography
and Water Resources
Water use and scarcity are a function of water supply and water demand. This
chapter focuses on the demand for water, with an emphasis on the social factors affecting
water use and availability: population growth, distribution, and migration; types and
distribution of water use including irrigation; clean water and sanitation access;
infrastructure; and institutions. Finally it includes a discussion of methods for measuring
and managing water scarcity.
POPULATION DISTRIBUTION AND MIGRATION
The study region includes some of the most densely populated areas on Earth as
well as some of the least densely populated regions, with a stark increase in population
density as one moves from the mountains to the ocean. As of 2010, India alone was home
to about 1.2 billion people, while Bangladesh and Pakistan each contained about 149 and
174 million people, respectively. Nepal had a smaller population of about 30 million,
while Bhutan was home to about 726,000 people (United Nations, 2011a).
The water dependencies and vulnerabilities of populations living in lower-lying
areas will be quite different from the dependencies and vulnerabilities of populations in
higher-lying ones. However, demographic compositional data are collected through
national censuses and surveys and are reported by administrative units, such as provinces
and states, which typically do not conform neatly to geographic features of interest, such
as river basins or zones of elevation. By using a spatial population model of gridded
population counts, though, it is possible to at least estimate the current population of each
country living in the watersheds of interest in this study. This can be further segmented
into coarse elevation zones (low, below 1,000 m; high, above 4,000 m; and moderate,
between 1,000 and 4,000 m). In this report, the Committee uses both GRUMP (CIESIN,
2004) and Landscan (2010) population data to estimate populations at risk, relying on the
former when estimating urban populations1 and the latter when estimating population
distribution per se.
Nepal and Bhutan are wholly contained within the Ganges and Brahmaputra river
basins, and most of Pakistan is found within the Indus basin. Bangladesh lies within the
Ganges, Brahmaputra, and Meghna basins; and India has territory within all of these
basins, though much of India’s land area also falls outside of the main study watersheds
(Figure 3.1). Note, as discussed in Chapter 1, that the population density of the
Himalayan Endorheic basins is very small, and therefore the Committee focused the
1

GRUMP data rely primarily on nighttime lights to delineate urban areas and therefore provide a crossnationally consistent basis by which to measure urban areas (Balk, 2009).

65
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

66

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

FIGURE 3.1 Population distributions in the HKH region. Population data were taken
from the Global Rural/Urban Population Mapping Project. Dashed lines indicate disputed
political boundaries, following the guidance issued by the U.S. State Department, and this
Committee takes no position on these boundary disputes.
discussions in this chapter on the Indus and Ganges/Brahmaputra basins. Estimates of the
shares of national populations living in these basins are presented in Table 3.1.
In 2010, approximately 195 million people lived in the Indus basin, with 16
percent of them (31.9 million) living at elevations above 1,000 m (Table 3.2). In contrast,
nearly all (97 percent) of the more than 600 million people in the Ganges/Brahmaputra
basin live at elevations below 1,000 m.2 Most of those living below 1,000 m elevation are
in India (79 percent) and Bangladesh (18 percent; Table 3.3). Even in Nepal, where 29
million people live in this basin, almost two-thirds live below 1,000 m elevation. Even in
mountainous Bhutan, more than one-quarter of its population in the Ganges/Brahmaputra
Basin lives at an elevation below 1000 m.

2

In Bangladesh, furthermore, nearly 60 percent of the population lives within 10 meters of sea level and
contiguous to the sea coast.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Human Geography and Water Resources

67

TABLE 3.1 Shares of national populations living in Hindu-Kush Himalayan region water
basins.
Country

Basin

Population
in Basina

National
Populationb

Afghanistan

Indus

10,636,154

31,412,000

Share of National
Population
Living in Basins
33.9%

Bangladesh

Gang/Brahm

103,326,928

148,692,000

69.5%

Bhutan

Gang/Brahm

699,847

726,000

96.4%

China

Gang/Brahm

1,712,145

1,348,932,000

0.13%

Indus

35,585
1,224,614,000

38.1%

India

Gang/Brahm

466,738,395

Indus

36,074,708

Nepal

Gang/Brahm

28,951,851

29,959,000

96.6%

Pakistan

Indus

148,104,460

173,593,000

85.3%

a
b

Landscan (2010)
United Nations (2011a)

On a global scale, the countries of this region encompass some of the world’s
poorest and least developed areas, alongside areas that are also experiencing rapid
economic growth. The region is characterized by relatively low shares of the population
living in cities. In 2000, Pakistan had the greatest percentage – one-third – of its
population living in cities. Despite relatively low levels of urbanization, this region is
home to some of the world’s largest cities: Dhaka (Bangladesh), Delhi (India), Kolkata
(India), Mumbai (India), Karachi (Pakistan), Lahore (Pakistan).3 Cities are growing
rapidly, with rates of urban growth that exceed those historically found in the West. In all
countries in this region, the average annual rate of change of the urban population
exceeds 2 percent, in Nepal and Bhutan, the rates exceed 4 percent per year. (United
Nations, 2011b). Nevertheless, the pace of urbanization in this region is not historically
unusual (NRC, 2003a). Urbanization may also affect water demand. Wealthier and more
urban populations, for example, have different dietary possibilities and preferences than
their rural counterparts, and changes in diet (e.g., toward consuming more meat) can have
implications for agricultural water demand.

3

One thing that makes Asia stand out, particularly the sub-regions dependent on the water resources of the
Indus and Ganges/Brahmaputra deltas, is the number of extremely large cities, or the phenomena of urban
“giganticism” (Preston, 1979).

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

68

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

TABLE 3.2 Population in the Ganges/Brahmaputra and Indus Basins, by Elevation and
Country. Data from Landscan (2010)
Country/Basin
<1,000 m
1,000 to 4,000 m >4,000 m
Afghanistan Population in Indus Basin
1,701,185
8,901,679
33,290
Share of Basin Population
16.0%
83.7%
0.3%
Living in Elevation Zone
Bhutan
Population in
193,974
496,887
8,986
Ganges/Brahmaputra
Basin
Share of Basin Population
27.7%
71.0%
1.3%
Living in Elevation Zone
Bangladesh Population in
103,326,928
Ganges/Brahmaputra
Basin
Share of Basin Population
100.0%
Living in Elevation Zone
1,433
866,630
844,082
China
Population in
Ganges/Brahmaputra
Basin
Population in Indus Basin
1,084
34,501
Share of Basin Population
0.08%
49.6%
50.3%
Living in Elevation Zone
459,157,952
7,502,996
77,447
India
Population in
Ganges/Brahmaputra
Basin
Population in Indus Basin
26,539,558
9,431,329
103,821
Share of Basin Population
96.6%
3.4%
0.04%
Living in Elevation Zone
Nepal
Population in
19,239,788
9,604,421
107,634
Ganges/Brahmaputra
Basin
Share of Basin Population
66.5%
33.2%
0.4%
Living in Elevation Zone
Pakistan
Population in Indus Basin
134,747,024
13,159,600
197,836
Share of Basin Population
91.0%
8.9%
0.1%
Living in Elevation Zone
Total Population in Ganges/Brahmaputra
581,920,075
18,470,934
1,038,149
Basin
Total Population in Indus Basin
162,987,767
31,493,692
369,448
TOTAL
744,907,842
49,964,626
1,407,597

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Human Geography and Water Resources

69

Rural dwellers tend to be poorer than their urban counterparts, but there is also
substantial urban poverty and slum-dwelling in this region. Water supply and wastewater
services in cities and towns are often underdeveloped, and many cities in the region are
located in areas of high flood potential, exacerbated by poor urban drainage during
monsoons (Moser and Satterthwaite, 2008). Urban poverty itself often exacerbates the
development of systems for delivery of water and sanitation, as well as access to those
resources when such systems are in place (Johnstone, 1997).
Nevertheless, cities serve as major magnets for migrants. Most migration takes
place within country, between cities themselves and between rural areas and cities.
International migration is a small share of total migration, although some borders are
effectively more fluid than others (for example, between Bangladesh and India).4
Although temporary migration has long been a strategy used by families and households
to accommodate climate variability (especially flooding), there is little evidence that
climate change or other environmental factors (with the possible exception of long-term
drought) result in major migration flows (McLeman and Smit, 2006; Tacoli, 2009). To
the contrary, many countries in the region are known for their high adaptive capacity.
Yet, theoretically it is possible that long-term changes to cropland and losses of
livelihood could make it more difficult to earn a living from farming. Such “livelihood
fragility” could affect migration over a much longer time span, albeit through a pathway
that is less direct than a single climate-related event or change in the environment
(Raleigh, 2011).
Migrants tend to be younger and better educated than those who do not move, and
it is these non-movers who may be regarded as most vulnerable. A recent study found
that migration has implications not just for the mover but for those left behind: “Poorer
households are likely to be ‘trapped’ in circumstances where they are at once more
vulnerable to environmental change and less able to move away from it” (GO-Science,
2011). That said, those who migrate are by no means better off than the native population
in their places of destination. New migrants often do not have access to land, housing,
safe water and sanitation,or public services (e.g., schooling or health care).
Projected Demographic Trends
Key population-related questions of interest for this study include whether certain
watersheds and elevation zones will experience higher rates of population growth than
others, and how the demographic composition of those specific areas will change.
Existing demographic methods, however, do not allow one to make such fine-grained
projections. That being said, one thing that we do know about the distribution of future
population is that countries in this region will become increasingly urbanized (Table 3.3)
and that cities (which are predominantly at lower altitudes) will continue to absorb
migrants in search of economic and other opportunities. Migration has the potential to
serve as an adaptive strategy to environmental change – even as the cities that receive the
migrants cope with their own set of economic challenges and environmental stresses and

4

The bulk of international migrants from Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal, and Pakistan stay within the
region (DRC, 2007).

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

70

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

vulnerabilities (Hardoy et al., 2001). However, many complex factors beyond
environmental change contribute to migration.
TABLE 3.3 Urban population projections as share of total population, by country 20102050. Based on data from United Nations (2011b).
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Nepal
Pakistan

2010
28.07%
34.71%
30.01%
18.62%
35.90%

2015
30.80%
38.54%
31.72%
21.58%
37.67%

2020
33.89%
42.40%
33.89%
24.78%
39.88%

2025
37.35%
46.23%
36.56%
28.18%
42.53%

2030
41.045
49.97%
39.75%
31.74%
45.62%

2035
44.84%
53.62%
43.30%
35.47%
49.07%

2040
48.69%
57.22%
46.93%
39.38%
52.54%

2045
52.57%
60.75%
50.58%
43.42%
55.98%

2050
56.415
64.17%
54.23%
47.56%
59.37%

Country-level population projections are limited by the fact that they do not have
any population-environment interactions or feedback loops built in. This will matter more
as projections are made further into the future. Nevertheless, it can be said with
substantial confidence that the populations of the countries in this region will grow
considerably over the next few decades. India alone is projected to add nearly half a
billion people to its population between 2010 and 2050 (Table 3.4). Larger populations
will result in increased demand for water and may exacerbate problems of resource
scarcity and vulnerability. Over the longer term, though, rates of population growth are
projected to become smaller over time (see Table 3.5). The slowing of population growth
will be driven by declines in fertility rates, which are in turn caused by, among other
things, rising standards of living, decreases in childhood mortality rates, and better access
to family planning.
TABLE 3.4 Population projections by country (in thousands) 2010-2050. Based on data
from United Nations (2011b).
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Nepal
Pakistan

2010
148,692
726
1,224,614
29,959
173,593

2015
158,317
784
1,308,221
32,581
189,648

2020
167,256
829
1,386,909
35,164
205,364

2025
175,195
867
1,458,958
37,653
220,609

2030
181,863
899
1,523,482
39,943
234,432

2035
187,103
924
1,579,802
41,977
246,789

2040
190,934
943
1,627,029
43,749
257,778

2045
193,344
956
1,664,519
45,257
267,240

TABLE 3.5 Population growth rates, by country, 2010-2050. Based on data from United
Nations (2011b).
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Nepal
Pakistan

20102015
6.47%
7.99%
6.83%
8.75%
9.25%

20152020
5.65%
5.74%
6.01%
7.93%
8.29%

20202025
4.75%
4.58%
5.19%
7.08%
7.42%

20252030
3.81%
3.69%
4.42%
6.08%
6.27%

20302035
2.88%
2.78%
3.70%
5.09%
5.27%

20352040
2.05%
2.06%
2.99%
4.22%
4.45%

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

20402045
1.26%
1.38%
2.30%
3.45%
3.67%

20452050
0.52%
0.63%
1.65%
2.74%
2.86%

2050
194,353
962
1,692,008
46,495
274,875

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Human Geography and Water Resources

71

PATTERNS OF WATER USE
Types of Water Use
There are many ways to measure water use, and care must be taken when
comparing different metrics. The most common type of water use measurement, and the
subject of this report, is the quantity of water withdrawn or consumed for human
purposes from surface water or groundwater. This type of water use is sometimes called
“blue water” use (Falkenmark and Rockstrom, 2006; Hoekstra et al., 2011). Water
withdrawal is defined as the amount of water withdrawn from surface or groundwater for
some human use. Some of this water may be returned to surface or groundwater after use.
Water consumption is typically defined as the amount of water withdrawn from surface
or groundwater that is not returned to the system, usually because it is lost to
evapotranspiration, incorporated into a final product, or contaminated too badly to be
reused.
“Green water” use is defined as the amount of rainwater used by natural
vegetation, land cover, and agricultural production primarily through rainfed crops
(Hoekstra et al., 2011). Both green water and blue water (irrigation water) are used for
agricultural production in the HKH region. If agricultural development replaces natural
land cover with crops with a higher level of evapotranspiration than natural vegetation, it
follows that a conversion from natural land cover to crops will decrease the amount of
runoff that makes its way into surface or groundwater.
In order for water to be useful, it must be available when and where it is needed.
Issues of water timing are often critical for both blue and green water use. For instance,
many climates have a rainy period where available water exceeds human demand and a
dry period where human demand exceeds available water. Because of the mismatch
between the natural hydrological cycle and human needs for water, infrastructure is often
built to help societies manage water; for example, many times reservoirs are constructed
to store water during wet periods for use during dry periods. Similarly, groundwater is
often used in the HKH region when surface supplies are insufficient due to seasonality of
water flows or short-term droughts.
Water must also be of sufficient quality to be of use, and different water uses
require different qualities. Some industrial and urban water uses require high quality
waters; agricultural often uses lower quality waters. When water is highly polluted due to
high salinity or concentrations of human or industrial wastes, water quality can become
the limiting factor for water availability – in some parts of the HKH region, pollution
may reduce overall water availability. Sometimes “gray water” use is also measured. In
the water footprint system of water use accounting, gray water is defined as the amount
of water needed to safely dilute a contaminant or problematic compound to a
concentration at which the water will be usable for some purpose, which is increasingly
important at a river basin scale (Hoekstra et al., 2011; note that this is a different concept
from municipal gray water, or sullage).
Any alterations to the water quantity or quality also have the potential to
negatively affect freshwater biodiversity or the natural ecosystem services they provide.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

72

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Often, a certain minimum environmental flow is calculated for a watershed and its
watercourses, which if left in surface and groundwater will be sufficient to maintain
freshwater biodiversity and crucial ecosystem processes (Poff et al., 2010). Necessary
environmental flows vary significantly between basins depending on the hydrology and
ecology.
Key Trends in Water Use
In general, the Committee found water use is greater relative to natural run-off in
the Indus Basin than in the Ganges/Brahmaputra Basin, consistent with the findings of
other studies (e.g., UNEP, 2008). At a national level, water use relative to availability is
lowest in Bhutan and Nepal, intermediate in Bangladesh and India, and greatest in
Pakistan.
National-level Water Use Statistics
Comprehensive and consistent data on water availability and water use are not
available for the HKH region, or most other regions of the world (Gleick, 2011). One of
the primary sources of data for gross water availability and withdrawals is the Aquastat
database maintained by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO, 2011). Aquastat data come from a variety of sources, estimates, and surveys,
including national-level estimates submitted by national governments. Because of the
lack of water availability and water use data, the Aquastat database contains the most
widely used estimates of these quantities, and is used here to assess broad patterns and
trends, but should not be considered scientifically rigorous. As discussed earlier in this
chapter, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal, and Pakistan have substantial portions of their
area contained within the watersheds that make up the study area. National-level water
availability and use data are also available for China, but they are not considered here
except in the context of the portions of the HKH watersheds shared by China.
One rough measure of water supply is the per-capita availability of water (the
total average renewable water supply of a region divided by the population of that
region). Another is the ratio of water withdrawals (as an indicator of demand for water) to
renewable water availability (as an indicator of water supply). Of the five countries,
Bhutan has the largest supply of water, both relative to water withdrawals and on a percapita basis. Total internal renewable water supply is 78 billion m3 yr-1, and because
Bhutan is located high in the Himalayas, there is no significant flow into the country from
elsewhere. Total per-capita available water remains high but has fallen slightly over time
with population, from 174,000 m3 person-1 yr-1 in 1992 to 109,000 m3 person-1 yr-1 in
2009 as its population has grown. Total water withdrawals were 0.34 billion m3 yr-1 in
2009, or around 470 m3 person-1 yr-1.
As a downstream nation, Bangladesh has greater reliance on external water
supplies relative to water withdrawals (Figure 3.2). Total internal renewable water supply
is about 100 billion m3 yr-1, supplemented by another 1.1 trillion m3 yr-1 of water that
flows in from outside the country. Total per-capita available water has fallen from

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Human Geography and Water Resources

73

FIGURE 3.2 Available per-capita water and per-capita water withdrawal for countries in
the study region. Countries are arranged from greater relative water stress (left) to less
relative water stress (right). Note the logarithmic scale on the Y-axis. Available percapita water is shown as a stacked bar-chart for two points in time, showing the portion
of available water that originates within a country (internal; black) or that originates in
headwaters located in another country (external; gray). The per-capita withdrawal
information is shown as a white triangle for the most current time point. PAK= Pakistan,
IND= India, BAN= Bangladesh, NEP= Nepal, and BHU= Bhutan. For Nepal, per-capita
withdrawal information was only available for the year 2002. For India, per-capita
withdrawal information was linear interpolated between the years 2002 and 2010, to
estimate the value in 2008. SOURCE: Based on data from FAO (2011).
approximately 10,000 m3 person-1 yr-1 in 1992 to 7,700 m3 person-1 yr-1 in 2008. Total
water withdrawals were 36 billion m3 yr-1 in 2008, or around 220 m3 person-1 yr-1.
India’s water withdrawals are closer to water availability than most other
countries in the region (Figure 3.2). Total internal renewable water supply is 1,400 billion
m3yr-1, supplemented by another 640 billion m3yr-1 of water that flows in from outside the
country. Total per-capita available water has fallen from 2,100 m3person-1yr-1 in 1992 to
1,600 m3person-1yr-1 in 2008. Total water withdrawals are increasing from 500 billion
m3yr-1 in 1990 to 760 billion m3yr-1 in 2010, or from around 560 m3person-1yr-1 in 1990 to
640 m3person-1yr-1 in 2010. India contains several large watersheds and these national
average figures hide significant regional variations. In some basins, total water demands
are approaching, or may have reached, the limits of renewable water availability. In other

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

74

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

basins, water use already depends on non-renewable extraction of groundwater resources,
which is unsustainable in the long run.
Nepal has a substantial supply of water in both absolute terms and relative to
water withdrawals, on a per-capita basis (Figure 3.2). Total internal renewable water
supply is about 200 billion m3yr1, supplemented by another 12 billion m3yr-1 of water that
flows in from outside the country. Total per-capita available water has fallen from
approximately 10,500 m3person-1yr-1 in 1992 to 7,300 m3person-1yr-1 in 2008 due to
population growth. Total water withdrawals were 10 billion m3yr-1 in 2000, or around 390
m3person-1yr-1 in 2002.
Pakistan’s internal water supplies are very limited relative to water withdrawals,
on a per-capita basis (Figure 3.2). Total internal renewable water supply is only 55 billion
m3yr-1, supplemented by another 180 billion m3yr-1 of water that flows in from outside the
country. Population growth has reduced total per-capita available water, which has fallen
from 1,900 m3person-1yr-1 in 1992 to 1,300 m3person-1yr-1 in 2008. Total water
withdrawals are increasing from 160 billion m3yr-1 in 1990 to 180 billion m3yr-1 in 2008,
but on a per-capita basis have fallen from around 1,300 m3person-1yr-1 in 1990 to 1,000
m3person-1yr-1 in 2008. Pakistan would not be able to meet its water withdrawal demand
without external water resources, primarily from rivers that flow from India into the
Indus, as allocated by the Indus Waters Treaty.
National water availability and use data for China are uninformative for this
study, because they are dominated by regions of the country outside of the HKH study
area. Nevertheless, China is the upstream nation on major watersheds of the HKH region;
the Tibetan Plateau encompasses the origins of the Ganges (whose headwaters are mostly
in India), the Brahmaputra (which joins the Ganges in Bangladesh), and the Indus Rivers.
Thus, China can influence the long-term regional management of these rivers. In
addition, the Chinese government has announced plans for “leapfrog development” in the
Tibetan Plateau, including improving the economic status of farmers and herders and
providing services such as education, health, and social security – with the express
purposes of achieving stability and national unity (Xinhua News, 2010). Mining (which
requires water (see Xiang (2010) for a study of mining effects on river water quality in
Tibet) and hydroelectric dams are part of planned development in the Tibetan region
(Watts, 2010). In addition, Chinese plans to divert some regional water resources from
the south to its northern regions will also play a role in future regional water politics
(Turner, 2011). Further analysis of how climatic factors, including glacier retreat, may
influence Chinese needs for water and Chinese water policies is needed.
Water for Irrigation
In most countries, the largest sector of water use is the agricultural sector, which
withdraws, and consumes through evapotranspiration, large quantities of water for
irrigation. The general trend throughout the study area is for increased irrigation water
withdrawals to put increasing strain on hydrologic supplies of available water. See Box
3.1 for a historical overview of early and modern irrigation systems.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Human Geography and Water Resources

75

BOX 3.1
Early and Modern Irrigation Systems
The history of irrigated agriculture in the region goes back to Harappan
civilization during the Bronze Age in the greater Indus basin and adjacent areas. Early
irrigators relied on shallow wells, flood inundation canals, and simple diversions from
adjacent streams to water farm lands in arid and semi-arid regions. With time and the
advent of canals, surface waters could be delivered to arable lands that were less
proximate to surface water courses. Canal irrigation expanded most dramatically in South
Asia during the 19th and 20th centuries. Canals also allowed irrigators some control over
the timing and quantity of water applied to crop land. Groundwater initially became a
source of irrigation supply with the development of simple water lifting devices powered
by humans and animals. The use of groundwater for irrigation allowed lands to be
irrigated in dry seasons in drought periods when surface supplies were diminished or
absent altogether.
The Persians were early groundwater innovators who developed the Qanat or
Karez system of tapping and conveying groundwater. This system required the drilling of
multiple wells into alluvial water-bearing formations in foothill environments and then
constructing a tunnel that conveyed water underground to elaborate surface water
distribution systems on the plains. This clever system, which is still used in some
locations in the Middle East and South Asia (Mustafa, 2011), permitted the extraction of
groundwater by gravity and avoided the need to lift the water from the wells. This system
required a high level of community cohesion to operate effectively.
Much later electrical and diesel pumps were developed that allowed water to be
lifted from wells in substantial quantities. Early pumps were limited in the depth from
which they could lift water but the later development of modern submersible pumps
allowed the pumping of groundwater from great depths. Simultaneously, small
inexpensive pumps were developed that allowed growers to lift water to irrigate small
farm acreage (Shah, 2009).
Again, historically water was applied through simple flood irrigation technologies
where fields were flooded at times of high water. Flood irrigation was replaced in many
parts of the world by furrow and basin irrigation that allowed the grower more control
over the timing and quantities of water application. Over the last 75 years of the 20th
century, closed conduit irrigation systems were increasingly developed and employed.
These systems, which include various types of sprinklers and, later, drip and sprinkler
irrigation systems allow water to be applied with great precision. These systems are
particularly well-adapted to irrigate loose agricultural soils where control of infiltration
rates is very important in determining irrigation efficiency, and have substantial
additional potential. By contrast, surface application systems like furrows and basins are
best suited for farming operations on tight soils where infiltration rates are low and tend
to be more constant, particularly where precision land leveling and watercourse
improvements were adopted. Modern irrigation technology has resulted in more
extensive and more efficient irrigation, particularly when linked with institutional and
management reforms. Yet, in many instances, such as South Asia, it has increased the
pressure on both surface and groundwater sources and even threatened the long-term

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

76

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

sustainability of the basic water resource (e.g., due to soil and water salinity; CAST,
1988; c.f., extensive publications on irrigation in South Asia by the International Water
Management Institute).
Irrigated area in the study region is shown in Figure 3.3. According to the Global
Map of Irrigated Area (Siebert et al., 2007) which is nominally for around the year 2000,
irrigation is widespread in the Indus basin, with a total of 15 million ha equipped for
irrigation, the vast majority of which is in Pakistan. However, the national and basin-level
data are rough estimates. According to FAO Aquastat data, Pakistan had about 16 million
ha equipped for irrigation in 1990, which had risen to 20 million ha by 2008. Total
Pakistan agricultural water withdrawal went from 150 billion m3yr-1 in 1991 to 170
billion m3yr-1 in 2008, or from 9,600 m3ha-1yr-1 in 1991 to 8,600 m3ha-1yr-1 in 2008.
Another useful large-scale dataset (Hoekstra and Mekonnen, 2011) provides
estimates of water consumption by basin for irrigation of different crops. Around 120
billion m3yr-1 of irrigation water were estimated to be consumed through
evapotranspiration in the Indus. Total consumptive water use for irrigation is
approximately 100 billion m3yr-1 for the Ganges, much greater than the 1.4 billion m3yr-1
for the Brahmaputra. More than a third of irrigation water consumed is used for wheat,
with rice taking just under a third of the remaining water. Compared to the other basins in
the study area, a relatively large amount of irrigated water consumption in the Indus basin
is for cotton production, along with rice, sugarcane, and wheat. In the Brahmaputra basin,
by comparison, around 75 percent of irrigated water was used to grow rice.
Irrigation is very common in the Ganges and less common in the Brahmaputra
basin. The overall Ganges/Brahmaputra basin supported 29 million ha of area equipped
for irrigation around 2000, primarily in India but also in Bangladesh. Nepal has much
more limited irrigated area due to its climate and topography. According to Aquastat
data, India had a total of 62 million ha equipped for irrigation in 2001, which had risen to
66 million ha by 2008. Total Indian agricultural water withdrawal increased from 560
billion m3yr-1 in 2000 to 690 billion m3yr-1 in 2008, or from 9,000 m3ha-1yr-1 in 2000 to
10,400 m3ha-1yr-1 in 2008. Bangladesh had 5 million ha equipped for irrigation in 2008.
Total Bangladeshi agricultural water withdrawal was 32 billion m3yr-1 in 2008, or around
6,300 m3ha-1yr-1. Assuming the average Indian application rate of 9,000 m3ha-1yr-1 in
2000 is accurate for the irrigated area in the Ganges/Brahmaputra basin, total withdrawals
in 2000 were 260 billion m3yr-1.
There is very little irrigation in the upstream nations of the Himalayan plateau
region (Figure 3.3). The only exception seems to be near Koko Nor (Qinghai) Lake in the
Tibetan Plateau and the far northern portions of the study area, which includes parts of
northwest Gansu province of China. Because this small amount of irrigated area is
dwarfed by irrigated areas elsewhere in China, the Aquastat statistics on overall irrigation
in China are not informative.
Groundwater and surface water are frequently substitutes for each other. There are
many historical examples where emerging shortages in surface water supplies were offset
by increased reliance on groundwater and vice versa. It would not be unreasonable,
therefore, to consider further groundwater development and use as a potential response to

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Human Geography and Water Resources

77

FIGURE 3.3 Fraction of the land equipped for irrigation in the HKH region. Irrigation is
widespread in both the Indus and Ganges/Brahmaputra basins. A relatively large amount
of irrigated water consumption in the Indus basin is for cotton production. In the
Brahmaputra basin, by comparison, irrigation water use is dominated by rice production,
while in the Ganges basin, irrigated water is used primarily for wheat production.
surface water shortfalls that might ultimately occur because of changes in the rates and
magnitudes of glacial melt.
Today groundwater use is the focus of what Shah (2009) characterizes as a
“colossal anarchy”. The need to feed a growing population and agricultural markets has
resulted in intense pressure to farm arable land as extensively and intensively as possible.
In India, this has caused a transition away from the established large-scale irrigated
agriculture that relied on water deliveries through canals and irrigation systems that were
managed in a more centralized bureaucratic way. The combination of land scarcity, the
availability of small, inexpensive pumps which can be used to extract groundwater, and
subsidized electricity has led to a situation in which approximately 22 million farmers in
India, for example, are pumping groundwater in an individualistically competitive
fashion to intensively irrigate relatively small plots of land. The resultant levels of
groundwater overdraft are significant. Thus, for example Rodell et al. (2009) estimated
that between 2002 and 2008, groundwater extraction in three Indian states (Rajasthan,
Punjab and Haryana) exceeded recharge by 18 billion m3yr-1 (Rodell et al., 2009). This

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

78

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

estimate is consistent with the empirical data referred to in the previous chapter that
documents the magnitude of groundwater overdraft. It is clear that current levels of
groundwater overdraft cannot be sustained and efforts to “tame the anarchy” have not
been especially successful to date (Shah, 2009).
Groundwater is managed in accord with the dictates of irrigated agriculture. As in
other parts of the world, the price of water includes no scarcity value for the water itself
and consists solely of the costs of extraction. Even extractive costs are at levels less than
their true value (or cost) because the cost of the energy has been subsidized in various
ways by governments. This results in an array of water prices that significantly understate
the real value of the water, sending, in turn, false signals to consumers about its relative
scarcity. That is, the prevailing prices signal irrigators that water is more plentiful that it
is in fact. The consequence is that cropping patterns are not always appropriate and the
quantities of water applied are more than they would be if the water was appropriately
priced.
At least two factors militate against bringing extractions into some reasonable
balance with recharge. First, the sheer numbers of extractors mean that the transaction
costs associated with any of the conventional forms of groundwater regulation such as
pump taxes (prices) and supervised pumping quotas would be enormous and would
outweigh any likely benefits of such regulation. Second, groundwater extractors could
collectively represent a significant political force that would resist any attempts by
government to require or induce reductions in the quantities of groundwater extracted or
energy subsidized. An additional and potentially problematic feature of this situation is
that successful efforts at groundwater regulation, whether by pricing, pump quotas and
other means such as the control of complementary inputs, would condemn large numbers
of people who currently survive by irrigating small plots with groundwater to poverty
(Shah, 2009). Thus, India’s groundwater economy is very likely to become a source of
additional demands for surface water as elements of the groundwater resource become
economically exhausted. Indeed, the consequences of such economic exhaustion are
thought to be so severe that a contested plan has been proposed to link the Himalayan
Rivers with the peninsular rivers of India which would allow the import of some 200 km3
annually to southern and western India to offset the effects of overdraft (Shah, 2009;
Supreme Court of India, 2012; cf., Iyer, 2012).
Water Use in Other Sectors
In most countries, the sector that makes the most withdrawals after agriculture is
the municipal and industrial sector. In some regions, withdrawals for electric power
production and cooling are predominant, though urban withdrawals are increasingly
significant. Figure 3.4 shows the location of the major cities within the study area. Most
major cities in Pakistan are within the Indus basin or draw their water from the Indus
(e.g., Karachi). Kabul, Afghanistan, is also in the upper headwaters of the basin. Aquastat
data estimates 2.5 billion m3yr-1 of withdrawals for municipal purposes in Pakistan in
1991, rising to 9.7 billion m3yr-1 in 2009, or from around 20 m3person-1yr-1 in 1992 to 54
m3person-1yr-1 in 2008. However, the per-capita statistics from Aquastat divides
municipal water use by the total population of the country, not just that of urban dwellers.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Human Geography and Water Resources

79

FIGURE 3.4 Major urban areas in the HKH region. Urban water withdrawals are
increasingly significant, and the location of urban areas provide a rough estimate of the
location of most municipal and industrial water withdrawals.
Another dataset, the Global Rural/Urban Mapping Project (GRUMP) database
(CIESIN, 2004), maps cities for the region. The version of this dataset developed for
McDonald et al. (2011a) was used, which considered only urban agglomerations of more
than 50,000 people. This dataset estimates 41.5 million urban dwellers in Pakistan in
2000. Dividing the Aquastat value for municipal withdrawal in 2000 of 6.4 billion m3yr-1
by just this urban population, that is a use rate of 154.2 m3urbanite-1yr-1. The GRUMP
database shows 34.3 million urban dwellers in the Indus basin, which with the above use
rate would imply 5.3 billion m3yr-1 of municipal withdrawals in the Indus Basin in 2000.
This approach, however, ignores cities that are outside the Indus Basin but draw water
from it through canals (c.f., McDonald et al., 2011b).
The majority of the 87.9 million urban dwellers in cities > 50,000 in the Ganges
basin in 2000 were in India (69.6 million), with some in Nepal (2.6 million) or
Bangladesh (15.6 million). Total urban population in India in 2000 was 234.9 million in
cities > 50,000, and Aquastat lists total municipal withdrawals in 2000 as 42 billion m3yr1
, which implies a use rate of 179 m3urbanite-1yr-1. This would imply that total municipal
withdrawals from the Ganges/Brahmaputra Basin in India in 2000 were 12.4 billion m3yrPREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

80

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

1

. Total urban population in Bangladesh in 2000 was 23.2 million in cities > 50,000, and
Aquastat lists total municipal withdrawals in 2008 as 3.6 billion m3yr-1, which implies a
use rate of 155 m3urbanite-1yr-1. This would imply that total municipal withdrawals from
the Ganges/Brahmaputra Basin in Bangladesh in 2000 were 2.4 billion m3yr-1. Finally,
the entire urban population of Nepal is within the Ganges/Brahmaputra Basin, and so
Aquastat’s estimate of total municipal withdrawals in 2000 as 0.20 billion m3yr-1 can be
assumed to be all from the Ganges/Brahmaputra Basin. Bhutan’s total municipal
withdrawals in 2008 was 0.017 billion m3yr-1 are all from the Brahmaputra Basin.
The other major sector making water withdrawals is the industrial sector, whose
spatial distribution generally follows that of urban areas. Industrial withdrawals from the
Ganges/Brahmaputra in India are unknown, and country-level industrial water statistics
for India as a whole can be misleading, because a significant proportion of India’s
industrial capacity is in other river basins. Nevertheless, it is likely the largest industrial
water user in the Ganges/Brahmaputra basin. Nepal’s industrial withdrawals of 0.40
billion m3yr-1 in 2000 are all taken from the Ganges Basin, while Bhutan’s industrial
withdrawals of 0.003 billion m3yr-1 in 2008 are all taken from the Brahmaputra Basin.
Similarly, a large portion of Bangladesh’s 0.77 billion m3yr-1 in 2008 are taken from the
Ganges or the Brahmaputra basins. Relatively little industrial activity happens in China in
the Brahmaputra basin. The majority of Pakistan’s 1.4 billion m3yr-1 of industrial
withdrawals in 2008 was likely from the Indus Basin.
Water is also used to produce hydroelectricity in the region (see Figure 3.5).
While this water use is typically considered as non-consumptive, large dams lose water to
evaporation, and new dam construction will increase this consumptive use. The
Committee does not provide estimates of these demands here, but notes that changes in
the hydrologic cycle in the Himalayas will have implications for power production and
increases in temperatures will increase consumptive losses from reservoir surfaces. The
Brahmaputra is the least dammed of all the major rivers in the study area, with the
significant exception of the Yamzho Yumco dam in China. In contrast, both the Ganges
and the Indus have a number of large dams and proposals for many more. In addition,
China has plans for extensive expansion of dams on the Mekong, Salween, Irrawaddy,
and other regional rivers, and Pakistan (along with donors) has longstanding plans to
further dam the Indus. All of these plans have been extensively criticized for their
potential disruptions.
The operation of a dam or system of dams almost always entails complex issues and
trade-offs that must be anticipated. This is true because river inflows, the input to
reservoir storage, are subject to hydrologic variability and are thus rarely constant from
year to year. It is also true because dams are rarely built to satisfy a single purpose and
the allocation of reservoir outflows need to be balanced over time and between purposes
depending upon available storage. Consider a dam that holds storage for both flood
control and to provide irrigation water for nearby farm lands. Common practice is to
release water and draw down the storage pool in advance of the rainy and/or snowmelt
season to provide storage for flood flows thereby lessening the chances of downstream
flooding. However, if the reservoir drawdown occurs in circumstances where irrigation
water is unneeded and the anticipated floods fail to occur, water that could have been
stored for the next irrigation season is lost. This problem requires management regimes
that recognize the inherent conflicts between the purposes for which the reservoir is

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Human Geography and Water Resources

81

FIGURE 3.5 Dams listed in the GRAND database are shown in blue. Note that this
database is not complete, and newer or smaller dams may be missing from this figure.
The Brahmaputra is the least dammed of the major rivers in the study region. In contrast,
both the Ganges and the Indus are highly dammed.
managed. The problems become considerably more complicated when there is more than
one dam to be operated conjointly and/or there are multiple purposes to be served (Yeh
and Becker, 1982). There are few river basins where there is sufficient water everywhere,
all the time, to serve fully all of the various purposes and activities that require water.
Typically, the resulting problems are managed by specifying a set of operating criteria
under which releases from reservoirs are governed by inflows in the current and recent
years, the time or season of the year, the demands for water to serve different purposes
and any legal or administrative constraints. Operating criteria will usually require
revision from time to time in response to changing hydrology as well as new laws and
regulations that require new management regimes (Benson, 2008). Constraints of water
scarcity will likely become more intense in the future and will also be manifested in times
and places where they have not appeared before (Milly et al., 2008).

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

82

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Projected Water Use Trends
Water use may change in the HKH region, with implications for water scarcity.
Generally, water use seems to be increasing over time in both the Indus and
Ganges/Brahmaputra Basins, a trend that will likely continue over the next several
decades. This alone would increase physical water scarcity without changes in human
water use practices. For instance, in India one estimate is that by 2050 Indian demands
will exceed all available sources of supply, regardless of climate change (World Bank,
2006). Human water use practices will also change. Construction of dams and other
infrastructure will change water use patterns. Rising standards of living are also likely to
increase water use.
This section begins by presenting information on how water use may change for
irrigation water use, municipal water use, and industrial water use. This information
whenever possible is presented relevant to specific basins (i.e., Indus,
Ganges/Brahmaputra), but national-level statistics for the five countries (i.e., Bangladesh,
Bhutan, India, Nepal, Pakistan) in the study area are also used. Generally, much of the
focus is on water use by India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh, as Bhutan and Nepal have
relatively small water withdrawals. Next is a discussion of how changes in water use will
affect metrics of water scarcity in the region. The effects of climate change on water
availability will be discussed in a narrative fashion; the Committee did not develop
quantitative scenarios of how hydrologic flows will change in each of the basins in
response to climate change. The potential changes in water supply discussed earlier in
this chapter could also affect water use.
Water for Irrigation
Trends in irrigation water use are varied throughout the region. In some countries,
irrigated crop area has been increasing, which increases water use. At the same time, in
some countries average irrigation rates (m3ha-1yr-1) have been decreasing, due to more
efficient applications of irrigation water or to changes in the kinds of crops produced,
which decreases water use. Future trends in irrigation water use are difficult to predict,
and depend on (among other things) changes in farmer practices, government policies
toward irrigation, and the magnitude and direction of the effect of climate change on
evapotranspirative demand of crops.
In the Indus Basin, around 15 million ha of cropland was equipped for irrigation
in 2000 (Siebert et al., 2007), mostly in Pakistan. Aquastat (FAO, 2011) statistics show
that between 1990 and 2008 area equipped for irrigation in Pakistan increased by 1.3
percent annually, up to 20 million ha, the vast majority of which is in the Indus basin. If
this trend continues, by 2030 Pakistan would have 25 million ha and by 2050 there would
be 30 million ha. At the same time, between 1990 and 2008, the irrigation rate fell by 0.5
percent annually, to 8,600 m3ha-1yr-1. Assuming this trend continues, by 2030 Pakistan’s
irrigation rate would fall to 7,500 m3ha-1yr-1 and by 2050 would reach 6,500 m3ha-1yr-1.
The net result of such a scenario for Pakistan would be an increase in agricultural
withdrawals from 170 billion m3yr-1 in 2008 to 190 billion m3yr-1 in 2030 and 195 billion
m3yr-1 in 2050. Assuming that in the future a similar fraction of water withdrawals are

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Human Geography and Water Resources

83

consumed, water consumption under such a scenario would increase from around 120
billion m3 yr-1 in 2000 to 128 billion m3 yr-1 in 2030 and 132 billion m3 yr-1 in 2050.
Whether such a scenario would be feasible depends on whether there is enough
water available to meet this increased need, whether there is adequate arable land to
allow continued expansion of irrigated area, and whether Pakistan can make the
necessary investments in improving irrigation efficiency. Scenarios of future agricultural
water use developed by Archer et al. (2010) are similar, and the authors stressed the
necessity of increased water storage to allow for a continued increase in agricultural
withdrawals. Moreover, agricultural withdrawal and consumption could be significantly
reduced if Pakistan increased the productivity of agricultural water use, which would
permit them to expand production without substantial increases in demand for water,
through on-farm and basin efficiency improvements, changes in irrigation technology and
management, changes in crop types, or other practices.
The overall Ganges/Brahmaputra basin had 29 million ha of area equipped for
irrigation in 2000 (Siebert et al., 2007), primarily in India and to a lesser extent
Bangladesh. Nepal and Bhutan have much more limited irrigated area due to their climate
and topography, a trend likely to persist into the future. India’s irrigated area increased by
0.9 percent annually between 2001 and 2008, with some of the increase in the Ganges
basin and some of it elsewhere in the country. Over the same time period, India’s
irrigation rate has increased by around 2 percent annually, from 1995 to 2008,
Bangladesh’s irrigated area, which is in both the Ganges and Brahmaputra basin,
increased by 2.3 percent annually. Time-series data for Bangladesh on irrigation rate is
unavailable, although in 2008 it appeared to be lower than Indian rates, at around 6,300
m3ha-1yr-1. Other pertinent data reveal that about 75 percent of total land cultivated in
Bangladesh is irrigated by groundwater (Zahid and Ahmed, 2006) and that groundwater
has been decreasing (Shamsudduha et al., 2009). Thus, irrigation in Bangladesh has been
increasing with noticeable effects on groundwater depletion.
Because the vast majority of irrigated area in the Ganges/Brahmaputra is in India,
changes in irrigation practices in India will drive changes in the Ganges/Brahmaputra
area. If the irrigated area in the overall Ganges/Brahmaputra continues expanding at the
same rate as irrigated area is currently expanding in India, by 2030 there would be 39
million ha of area equipped for irrigation and by 2050 some 48 million ha. It is not clear
whether there is enough room in the crowded Ganges basin for such a continued
expansion, nor is it clear that there is sufficient water. If India’s irrigation rate remains at
2008 levels of around 10,400 m3ha-1yr-1, such a scenario would increase agricultural
water withdrawals in the Ganges/Brahmaputra from 260 billion m3yr-1 in 2000 to 400
billion m3yr-1 in 2030 and nearly 500 billion m3yr-1 in 2050. It seems unlikely that there is
enough water in the Ganges to support this level of withdrawal, particularly in the dry
months (see discussion below).
This scenario for the Ganges/Brahmaputra is similar to one developed by the
Water Resources Group (2009), which predicted that, if current trends continue, by 2030
Indian agricultural withdrawals would have nearly doubled from current levels. This
report also notes that changes in the agricultural sector’s water use also represents the
most cost-effective way to reduce India’s water withdrawals, especially implementation
of measures that increase yields from India’s cropland without increasing water applied
as irrigation. Similarly, Cai et al. (2010) found that if less productive areas in India were

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

84

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

to achieve the same water productivity as more productive areas, agricultural withdrawals
could be reduced by 31 percent without reducing agricultural production.
Municipal Water Use
Trends in the municipal sector are consistent across countries, with an increasing
urban population resulting in an increase in municipal withdrawals. Trends in the use-rate
(m3urbanite-1yr-1) are generally not available as time-series, although economic
development is likely to increase this use rate over time.
In 2000, the GRUMP database (CIESIN, 2004) shows 34 million urban dwellers
in the Indus basin (cities > 50,000 people). The vast majority of these urbanites are in
Pakistan, where the average urban use rate was around 150 m3urbanite-1yr-1, a relatively
high rate, which with the above use rate would imply over 5 billion m3yr-1 of municipal
withdrawals in the Indus Basin in 2000. For Pakistan as a whole, urban population is
projected to increase by 3.1 percent per year between 2000 and 2030, or by 2.8 percent
per year between 2000 and 2050 (UNPD, 2009). If this rate of urban population growth
holds for the Indus Basin as a whole, population might grow to nearly 85 million urban
dwellers (cities > 50,000 people) by 2030 and 140 million urban dwellers (cities > 50,000
people) by 2050. Assuming the urban use rate of water stays the same, expected
population growth implies an increase in municipal water use to 13 billion m3yr-1 of
municipal withdrawals in the Indus Basin in 2030 and 22 billion m3yr-1 of municipal
withdrawals in the Indus Basin in 2050.
In 2000, there were 88 million urban dwellers in cities > 50,000 in the
Ganges/Brahmaputra basin, primarily in India (70 million) and to a lesser extent
Bangladesh (16 million) (CIESIN, 2004). India had an urban use rate of 179 m3urbanite1 -1
yr , and Bangladesh had an urban use rate of 155 m3urbanite-1yr-1. For India, urban
population is projected to increase by 2.4 percent per year between 2000 and 2030, or by
1.7 percent per year between 2000 and 2050. Bangladesh is forecast to have similarly
rapid urban population growth, increasing by 3.1 percent per year between 2000 and
2030, or by 2.1 percent per year between 2000 and 2050. Assuming these urban
population growth rates, and that urban use rate stays the same, India’s municipal
withdrawals from the Ganges/Brahmaputra basin would grow from 12 billion m3yr-1 in
2000 to 26 billion m3yr-1 in 2030 and 29 billion m3yr-1 in 2050. Similarly, Bangladesh’s
municipal withdrawals from this basin would grow from just over 2 billion m3yr-1 in 2000
to 6 billion m3yr-1 in 2030 and 7 billion m3yr-1 in 2050. Municipal withdrawals for Nepal
and Bhutan will likely increase as well, driven by increases in urban population in these
countries, although their municipal withdrawals will continue to be a very small
proportion of the municipal withdrawals in the Ganges/Brahmaputra basin.
This scenario of growth in municipal water demand in the Ganges/Brahmaputra
Basin appears consistent with the scenarios developed for India by Water Resources
Group (2009). That report predicted municipal demand would double from 2000 to 2030,
a slightly slower rate of growth than in the Committee’s scenario of growth developed
specifically for the Ganges.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Human Geography and Water Resources

85

Industrial Water Use
Industrial water use appears likely to increase over time, driven by increases in
population and economic development. In the Aquastat database, there is little consistent
trend in industrial water use per capita, with some countries increasing and some
countries decreasing. However, even if water use per capita stays constant at 2008 levels,
it appears likely industrial water use will continue to rise because of fast rate of
population growth in many of these countries.
The majority of Pakistan’s 1.4 billion m3yr-1 of industrial withdrawals in 2008 was
likely from the Indus Basin, and if industrial water use per capita stays the same might
rise to 2.3 billion m3yr-1 in 2030 and 3 billion m3yr-1 in 2050. India’s industrial
withdrawals in the Indus are unknown, but are likely smaller than Pakistan’s, because
few major Indian cities are located in the Indus basin.
Trends in India’s industrial withdrawals from the Ganges/Brahmaputra are
unknown, but are likely increasing over time. One study by the Water Resources Group
(2009), suggests that industrial withdrawals for all of India will quadruple, reaching 196
billion m3yr-1 in 2030. A large portion of Bangladesh’s 0.8 billion m3yr-1 of industrial
withdrawal in 2008 was taken from the Ganges/Brahmaputra basins, and if industrial
water use per capita stays the same might rise to 1.1 billion m3yr-1 in 2030 and 1.2 billion
m3yr-1 in 2050. Similarly, Nepal’s industrial withdrawals of 0.4 billion m3yr-1 in 2000 are
all taken from the Ganges Basin, and if industrial water use per capita stays the same
might rise to 0.6 billion m3yr-1 in 2030 and 0.7 billion m3yr-1 in 2050. Bhutan uses a
relatively trivial amount of water for industrial purposes, a trend that is likely to continue.
Trends in Water Scarcity
As discussed in Chapter 3, we primarily present simple metrics of physical water
scarcity. This approach is driven by the limited data available for more sophisticated
measures that take into account, for example, economic water scarcity or water quality
issues. However, we stress that these other issues may be important, and deserve future
study. Levels of water stress in the future will also be affected by adjustments to human
behavior or technological interventions to make existing water use more efficient. Both
of which are difficult to predict.
Even without climate change affecting water availability in the study area, many
countries would have a significant challenge providing enough water to meet their needs
under traditional projections. In this section, the Committee explores how some metrics
of water scarcity will change with increases in population and water use as well as with
climate change. Because quantitative scenarios of how the hydrologic cycle will be
affected by climate change were beyond the scope of this report, most of the discussion
of climate change will be narrative, describing the likely direction of change.
As noted earlier, the simplest way to define physical water scarcity is to take the
amount of water in a region and divide by the population. One common set of thresholds
defines regions with more than 1,700 m3person-1yr-1 as “water sufficient”, while those
below this threshold have some degree of water stress (<1,700 m3person-1yr-1), chronic
scarcity (<1,000 m3person-1yr-1), or absolute scarcity (<500 m3person-1yr-1) (Falkenmark,

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

86

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

1989; Falkenmark and Lindh, 1974; Falkenmark et al., 1989; Falkenmark and Widstrand,
1992). Using this metric, with population growth (ignoring potential changes in water
availability) Pakistan will move from water stress in 2000 (1,400 m3person-1yr-1) to
chronic scarcity in 2030 (900 m3person-1yr-1) and 2050 (700 m3person-1yr-1), even
without factoring in climatic changes to regional hydrology. Any reductions in flow in
the Indus caused by climate change would further intensify this scarcity. The next driest
country by this metric is India, which stays classified as water stressed but moves from
1,600 m3person-1yr-1 in 2009 to 1,300 m3person-1yr-1 in 2030 and 1,200 m3person-1yr-1 in
2050. By this simple measure, and ignoring potential changes in water availability,
Bangladesh, Bhutan, and Nepal remain classed as water sufficient through 2050.
Another way to define physical scarcity is the ratio of water use to water
availability. By this metric, and ignoring potential changes to water availability, the Indus
basin seems the most likely of any of the study area basins to face problems of water
scarcity (Figure 3.6). Significant increases in irrigation water use in this basin,
particularly during the dry months of November to March, may result in essentially all
flow in these months being used for irrigation. Increased irrigation water use in the
Ganges, particularly in the dry period of November to May, may likewise result in
essentially all flow in these months being used for irrigation (Figure 3.7). One potential
response by policymakers would be to attempt to increase storage during the monsoon
season so that water would be available for irrigation during the dry season. Even with
increases in irrigation water use by Bangladesh, the Brahmaputra basin seems less likely
to be water stressed according to this metric, except for a brief dry period in February and
March (Figure 3.6).
The picture that emerges is nevertheless one in which water scarcity, be it
generalized or seasonal, will intensify in the coming decades. Climate change will also
influence the extent and severity of intensifying scarcity. It follows, then, that one means
of addressing potential changes in hydrologic circumstances which are uncertain is to
ensure that current water management practices are as effective and equitable as possible.
This means making all efforts to increase and maintain the productivity of water that is
currently available. Such productivity increases need to be sought for both consumptive
and instream uses. Thus, for example, employment of more rational water pricing
practices and the development of flexible schemes of water allocation that will allow
droughts and unanticipated shortfalls to be managed in both a timely and effective way
could strengthen the capacity of the region to manage its water resources more effectively
in the face of climate change and other hydrologic uncertainties.
CLEAN WATER AND SANITATION ACCESS
A basic measure of water development and conditions is access to improved
drinking water and sanitation systems, as measured by the United Nations on a regular
basis. This measure forms the standard by which the water-related Millennium
Development Goals were set. Political and social stability is affected by the societal
capacity to cope with and adapt to large- and small-scale changes in water availability
that may result from from glacial retreat and other impacts of climate change on the
hydrologic system. This societal capacity, often called vulnerability or resilience,

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Human Geography and Water Resources

87

depends on conditions that promote human well-being generally. The water-related
aspects commonly measured include water availability or scarcity (discussed in the next
section) and clean water and sanitation, which are important for human health and
general well-being.
Countries in Africa have the most serious problems in terms of the fraction of
population without access to these basic water services, but Asia has the largest absolute
number of people without access (hundreds of millions), with a wide divergence among
countries and within countries. Table 3.6 shows the fraction of the populations in
countries of the region with access to “improved drinking” water systems and “improved
sanitation” systems, as of 2008 (WHO/UNICEF, 2010). As these data show, urban
dwellers are typically more reliably served than rural dwellers, and access to water is
typically higher than access to sanitation. However, national level estimates of improved
water and sanitation, even when stratified by urban and rural residence, tend to mask
considerable spatial variation in access. Data from the nationally representative
Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS),5 for example, suggest that there is greater
variation in access to clean water and sanitation in rural districts than urban districts. It is
possible, in principle, to use these data to create district-level mappings of access to clean
water and sanitation. This could provide finer grained insight into the geographic
distribution of water-related need and vulnerability, including by river basin and
proximity to the Himalayas.
MEASURING WATER SCARCITY
With the preceding analysis in mind, it is not surprising that there are many
different ways to measure water scarcity. Water scarcity can occur when problems of
water quantity, water quality, or timing mean there is not enough water to meet people’s
wants. Scarcity in the physical sense is often defined in terms of arbitrary but useful
criteria such as those discussed in the next paragraph. Economic scarcity is customarily
defined in terms of the cost of making water available and a willingness to pay. One
significant manifestation of economic scarcity is the economic exhaustion of groundwater
which contrasts with physical exhaustion as explained in Box 3.2. In this section, we
focus on simple measures of physical water scarcity, primarily because they are easy to
estimate from available data. Such an approach, however, should not be taken to imply
that other facets of water scarcity are not also extremely important to human livelihoods.
Perhaps the most common metric of physical water scarcity, and certainly the simplest to
calculate, is to take the average amount of water in a region and divide by the population
(Falkenmark, 1989; Falkenmark and Lindh, 1974; Falkenmark et al., 1989; Falkenmark
and Widstrand, 1992). These indices usually define regions with more than 1,700
m3person-1yr-1 as water sufficient, while those below this threshold had some degree of
water stress (<1,700 m3person-1yr-1), chronic scarcity (<1,000 m3person-1yr-1), or absolute
scarcity (<500 m3person-1yr-1). By this simple measure, Bangladesh, Bhutan, and Nepal
are classed as water sufficient, and Pakistan and India are classed as water stressed. As
noted above, these national averages hide important regional differences. Additionally,
the thresholds are somewhat arbitrary and this measure of water scarcity does not account
5

Data available at http://www.measuredhs.com/data/available-datasets.cfm

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

88

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

TABLE 3.6. Share of Population with Access to Improved Drinking Water and
Sanitation, by Country. SOURCE: Data from WHO/UNICEF (2010)
Afghanistan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
China
India
Nepal
Pakistan

Improved Drinking Water
Urban
Rural
Total
78
39
48
85
78
80
99
88
92
98
82
89
96
84
88
93
87
88
95
87
90

Improved Sanitation
Urban
Rural
Total
60
30
37
56
52
53
87
54
65
58
52
55
54
21
31
51
27
31
72
29
45

BOX 3.2
ECONOMIC EXHAUSTION OF GROUNDWATER
Groundwater is an important element of hydrologic systems throughout the world.
It is known to be a significant, if not completely understood, part of the hydrology of the
Himalayas, the Ganges Plain to the south and the southern Peninsula of India
(Bookhagen, 2012; Shah, 2009). Over time extractions of water from an aquifer must be
roughly equal to recharge if the aquifer is to remain economically viable. Overdraft is the
situation in which extractions exceed recharge. Overdraft itself is not problematic so long
as periods of intermittent overdraft are punctuated with periods in which recharge
exceeds extractions and the aquifer recovers. Over such periods of time the aquifer is in
equilibrium. Circumstances characterized by persistent overdraft are not sustainable in
the sense that extraction cannot be economically viable indefinitely. Where extractions
are consistently greater by volume than recharge, the water table falls and the elevation
from which water must be extracted grows.
The costs of groundwater extraction include the costs of needed energy and those
costs are highly sensitive to the depths from which the groundwater must be pumped. As
the water table is drawn down through overdraft the costs of extraction rise. Ultimately,
these costs rise to the point where it is no longer economically feasible to continue
pumping and the extractor or extractors in question cease to pump. In some instances this
will allow the aquifer to recover as recharge then exceeds extraction. There are other
instances where the storage capacity of the aquifer is altered (consolidated) or rates of
recharge are very small or non-existent, that it is no longer economical for any extractor
to withdraw water. At this point the aquifer is said to be economically exhausted.
Economic exhaustion is not necessarily identical to physical exhaustion, however,
because pumping depths from which extractions are no longer economically feasible can
be significantly smaller than the pumping depths that would prevail if all of the water in
the aquifer were extracted. These latter circumstances constitute physical exhaustion
(Glennon, 2002; NRC, 1997).

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Human Geography and Water Resources

89

FIGURE 3.6 Natural run-off (solid line) and blue water consumed (dashed line) per
month for the Brahmaputra. Note that the y-axis is a log scale. The Brahmaputra has very
little water scarcity, with the exception of February and March, although water
consumption still does not exceed natural run-off during those months. The large spike in
natural-run-off in the period June to September corresponds with the monsoon period.
SOURCE: Based on data from Hoekstra and Mekonnen (2011).
for water that flows across a border and ignores different uses of water in different
climates.
Another common, but more descriptive, way to consider physical water scarcity is
to look at the ratio of water withdrawals or consumption to total water available, which is
defined as natural streamflow by Hoekstra and Mekonnen (2011). Figure 3.6 shows
estimates of natural run-off and water consumption for the Brahmaputra basin, on a
monthly time-step. This river has very little water scarcity, with the exception of
February and March, and even then water consumption does not exceed natural run-off.
The large spike in water available in the period June to September corresponds with the
monsoon period of the year.
The Ganges basin (Figure 3.7) has a similar annual pattern, but water
consumption exceeds natural run-off for February and March. There is also a sharper
peak in natural run-off in the single month of August.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

90

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

FIGURE 3.7 Natural run-off (solid line) and blue water (dashed line) consumed per
month for the Ganges. The Ganges has very little water scarcity, with the exception of
February and March, when water consumption exceeds natural run-off. The large spike in
natural run-off in August corresponds with the monsoon period. SOURCE: Based on data
from Hoekstra and Mekonnen (2011).
Finally, the Indus basin (Figure 3.8) has a much higher percentage of the natural
run-off consumed over the whole year than the Ganges or the Brahmaputra basin, with
the percentage highest in the period October to March. However, water consumption does
not exceed natural run-off in any month for the Indus, in contrast with the Ganges.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Human Geography and Water Resources

91

FIGURE 3.8 Natural run-off (solid line) and blue water consumed (dashed line) per
month for the Indus. A higher percentage of the natural run-off is consumed than for the
Ganges or the Brahmaputra basin, with the percentage highest in the period October to
March. Water consumption does not exceed natural run-off in any month for the Indus.
SOURCE: Based on data from Hoekstra and Mekonnen (2011).
More sophisticated measures of water scarcity are available in the literature.
Sometimes measures of scarcity explicitly set aside a portion of available flow as an
environmental flow (EF). Sometimes issues of water quality are also considered, which
can be a limiting factor for many applications (McDonald et al., 2011a). Similarly,
measures of water scarcity sometimes incorporate information on how well water is
actually delivered to people. In many cities, for instance, a substantial fraction of people
live in neighborhoods without consistent access to safe drinking water, simply because
infrastructure is absent (UN-HABITAT, 2006).
Because data are sparse, it is not clear how increased glacier melt will affect total
runoff. However, it could affect the timing of runoff, which would in turn affect the ratio
of water consumption to natural run-off. For example, in the Brahmaputra, if the change
in runoff due to glacial melt occurs in February and March, there would be a larger
change in the ratio. If the runoff were to change during the Monsoon peak between June
and September, there could also be issues with flooding.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

92

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

WATER MANAGEMENT, INSTITUTIONS,
AND HYDROCLIMATIC CHANGE
The water use patterns described above are mediated by institutions at multiple
levels in the region - from international to national, state, and local water management,
and from mountain headwaters to plains and coastal environments. In addition to multiple
levels of management, water institutions span a range of subsectors from irrigation to
domestic, industrial, and environmental uses that often have separate agencies housed
under different ministries, and whose perspectives vary on hydroclimatic change. While a
full description, let alone discussion, of these complex water management systems lies
beyond the scope of this report, this section highlights patterns in the relationships
between climate change and water management in South Asia. Institutions that focus
more on disasters (e.g., devastating floods, droughts, GLOFs, etc.), vis-à-vis water
management more broadly, are addressed under the rubric of environmental security in
Chapter 4.
Increasing International Assessment
Considerable progress has been made in assessing water resources implications of
climate change in South Asia at international and national levels of analysis over the past
decade. Some advances have come about through regional intergovernmental
organizations (IGOs) such as the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
(SAARC), while others stem from multilateral donor-sponsored initiatives. Regional
IGOs like SAARC are devoting increasing attention to climate change, extreme events,
and disaster risk reduction (e.g., SAARC6; and cf. also Regional Integrated Multi-Hazard
Early Warning System for Africa and Asia (RIMES)7, which is an association of country
hydrometeorological agency directors in the greater Indian Ocean region). Water
management remains a sensitive topic that has historically been addressed through bilateral relations, though a 2012 SAARC-Chamber of Commerce and Industry (SAARCCCI) conference dealt with climate, energy, and water, and SAARC is increasingly active
in addressing hydroclimatic disaster preparedness.
Comparative international water resources analysis is also advancing through the
work of the South Asia Water Initiative which convenes countries in the region to
analyze water management issues related to climate change (SAWI, 2011). The World
Bank has conducted substantial analytical studies of water management and climate risk
in several countries and basins in the region (Pahuja et al., 2010; Sadoff and Rao, 2011;
Yu, 2010). These studies are helping increase awareness, analysis, and cooperation.
Among international non-governmental organizations contributing to these
advances, the Asia-Pacific Network for Climate Change organized an early study of
water resources impacts of climate change in South Asia (APN, 2004). More recently,
ICIMOD has supported cooperative international programs on snow and ice hydrology in
the Himalayan region (e.g., ICIMOD’s INDUS8 and HKH-HYCOS9 programs). Other
6

http://saarc-sdmc.nic.in/
http://www.rimes.int/about_overview.php
8
http://www.icimod.org/?q=265
7

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Human Geography and Water Resources

93

international non-governmental organizations have undertaken comparative case study
analyses of water management in the context of climate change across the region (e.g.,
ISET, 2008; Moench and Dixit, 2004) IWMI, 201210).
Formulation of National Water and Climate Policies
Several countries have articulated national water policies related to climate
change. In 2012, India issued a new Draft Water Policy that includes numerous
references to and a major section on adaptation to climate change (Government of India,
2012). The Ministry of Water Resources (2009-11) earlier published a two-volume work
that compiled Comprehensive Mission Documents for a National Water Mission under
National Action Plan on Climate Change (Government of India, 2009). Following a
summary of recommendations, it presented supporting documents on the current policy
context of water management, surface water, groundwater, and basin planning for climate
change.
Bangladesh has joint concerns about the coastal hazards of climate change,
inflows from major international rivers and tributaries, and domestic hydroclimatic risks.
To address these issues Bangladesh created an inter-agency Institute of Water Modeling
chaired by the Ministry of Water Resources as a center of climate change modeling, and a
Climate Change Cell11 for adaptation and mitigation programs including irrigation
agriculture under the Ministry of Environment.
The Government of Pakistan established a Global Change Impact Study Centre
that prepared 16 research reports, including one on Climate Change Implications and
Adaptations of Water Resources in Pakistan (Ali et al., 2009), which included a section
on policy needs. The GCISC studies contributed to a Planning Commission Task Force
Report on Climate Change. The Federal Cabinet adopted a climate change policy that has
substantial water resources provisions and a new Ministry on Climate Change in 2012.
These national actions occur at a time of constitutional devolution of authority for
environment, agriculture, and other sectors to the provinces and political uncertainty.
Nepal has been an early leader in scientific assessments of climate change on
water resources management (Gyawali, 2011). Nepal created a National Adaptation
Programme of Action followed by a Nepal Climate Change and Development Portal,12
which has a national branch of the Climate Action Network, youth alliances, and NGO
associations. These efforts occurred within what has become a larger context of
constitutional and governance uncertainties.
Bhutan has growing emphasis on climate change and hosted the SAARC meeting
on climate change at Thimpu in 2010. Its water policy is situated under its Ministry of
Agriculture, though it also has a substantial hydropower program under its Department of
Energy.
Afghanistan is concentrating on re-establishing hydrological monitoring and
water resources planning after a prolonged interruption. Water policy is addressed in a
9

http://www.icimod.org/?q=264
http://www.iwmi.cgiar.org/Topics/Climate_Change/default.aspx
11
http://www.climatechangecell.org.bd/
12
http://www.climatenepal.org.np/main/
10

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

94

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Land, which raises an interesting point of
comparison across countries where water and climate policies are variously situated in
ministries of agriculture, water resources, and environment.
Uneven Sub-National, State, and Local Water Management Capacity
Recent decades have witnessed trends toward devolution of water governance
from national or concurrent jurisdiction to state and local levels (i.e. the “subsidiarity
principle” in the Dublin Statement on Water and Sustainable Development, 199213).
Irrigation departments in India and Pakistan are situated at the state and provincial level
of government. In the case of Pakistan, while some recent annual plans for the provinces
refer to climate change, provincial budgets and department plans for 2012 do not yet
include major climate change adaptation analyses, programs, or policies analogous to
those being developed at the national level.
In comparison with government, however, the past generation of social scientific
research on local irrigation management by farmers in South Asia underscores their keen
perception of and adjustments to hydroclimatic variability (see numerous IWMI field
research studies of irrigation in South Asia14; Kreutzmann, 2000; and IUCN, n.d. for
examples).
It seems reasonable to summarize that at this point in time international and
national water organizations are making significant advances toward water resources
assessments of climate change that include snow and ice hydrology. National water
agencies are devoting increasing emphasis to climate impact and adaptation assessment.
It is less clear how these assessments affect management, policy, and inter-agency water
coordination. Similarly, while devolution of water governance to states and districts is
associated with increasing references to climate change in water sector planning
documents at those levels, the actual implications for budgeting, management, and
governance are less evident. The largest cities in South Asia are developing climate
adaptation plans that include water systems, but the rapidly growing proportion of
secondary and tertiary cities show limited evidence, capacity, or higher-level support for
addressing hydroclimatic effects on water supply, drainage, or wastewater management.
At local scales of irrigation management, however, there is substantial practical
experience with hydroclimatic adjustment. The robustness of these local forms of
adaptation in relation to longer-term and larger-scale trends in climate variability
associated with snow and ice hydrology is less well known.
CONCLUSIONS
Key features of the human geography of the HKH region were identified at the
workshop by the breakout groups on Hydrology, Water Supply, Use, and Management
and Demography and Security. Starting from those concepts, the Committee used their

13
14

http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/hwrp/documents/english/icwedece.html
http://www.iwmi.cgiar.org/Publications/index.aspx

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Human Geography and Water Resources

95

expert judgment, reviews of the literature, and deliberation to develop the following
conclusions:














Rural and urban poor may be most at risk, in part because the poor are least likely
to be able to retrofit, move, or rebuild as needed, when faced with risks. However,
the environment is not the only driving factor for migration and other
adjustments.
Social changes in the region have at least as much of an effect on water demand
as environmental factors do on water supply, leading to stress. Existing stress
could be exacerbated by climate change in the future.
Future population growth in specific watersheds or elevation zones is uncertain,
but there is certainty that the region will become increasingly urbanized.
Water resources management and provision of clean water and sanitation is
already a challenge in the countries that share the Himalayan watersheds. The
adequacy and effectiveness of existing water management institutions is a
reasonable, if coarse, indicator of how the region is likely to cope with changes in
water supply.
Changes in seasonal streamflow could have significant impacts on the local
populations by altering water availability patterns and affecting water
management decisions and policies for irrigation, municipal, industrial, and
environmental use.
Average aggregate water use data provide crude estimates of water supply,
demand, and scarcity. Increasing the detail, consistency, and accessibility of water
use data (along with streamflow and aquifer data as discussed in Chapter 2), are
key priorities for sound regional water assessment.
Water management assessments have advanced over the past 5 to 10 years,
though their implementation in water policies and programs is less clear; there is
to date limited penetration to lower levels of governance, or support for local
water managers who are most at risk.
Water use has been increasing over time in both the Indus and
Ganges/Brahmaputra Basins, and this trend will continue for the next several
decades, with irrigation by far the largest use.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

96

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

4
Environmental Risk and Security
Hydroclimatic hazards in the HKH region have the potential to affect the lives
and livelihoods of large numbers of people. Although climate change may be just one of
many elements in a complex system, it could also amplify existing political and security
stress and push water systems over critical thresholds. In this chapter, we discuss risks
and vulnerabilities related to natural hazards and provide an overview of water conflicts
and political stresses in the region. Environmental change can contribute to violent
conflict, especially where there is a history of such conflict and where governance
institutions lack capacity or are still in the process of consolidating. It can also threaten
political and social stability by creating obstacles to development, undermining public
health, causing population displacement, creating problems for traditional livelihood and
allocation systems, and affecting mediation tools.
NATURAL HAZARDS AND VULNERABILITY
It is useful to situate the risks associated with snow and ice hydroclimatology in
the HKH region within the broader context of natural hazards patterns and trends in
South Asia, which have varied in the region both in space and time. As of late 2011,
some one-third to one-half of the populations of South Asian countries were reported to
be food insecure1 due in part to flood, drought, and complex emergencies (World Food
Programme, 2011a). Monsoon flooding was affecting the plains and coastal areas of
Bangladesh and India, cloudbursts and landslides were occurring in the mountains in
northern India, floods and landslides were affecting Nepal, and monsoon flooding hit
coastal Pakistan (ReliefWeb, 2011).
In 2010, hydroclimatic hazards had a different spatial distribution in the region,
but again with significant consequences. Twenty million people were impacted by what
started as monsoon-related flash flooding in northern Pakistan and ballooned to one of
the worst natural disasters in the history of the country as one-fifth of the country’s land
area was submerged. In the aftermath of this flooding it is estimated that 90 million
people were food insecure, an increase from 83 million in 2009 (World Food Programme,
2011b).
Although few of these recent incidents directly involved snow and ice
hydroclimatology, questions were raised about the possible linkages with, and long-term
implications of, mountain hydroclimatic change for perennial and pervasive hazards in
the region. Moreover, food insecurity in some areas is a chronic hazard not associated
with disasters as much as structural political, social, and economic forces (e.g., Pakistan
1

The World Health Organization defines food security as “when all people at all times have access to
sufficient, safe, nutritious food to maintain a healthy and active life”.

97
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

98

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

National Nutrition Survey, (AKU and UNICEF, 2012), which indicated no improvement
in the percentage of the food insecure population over the past decade). This section
examines these wider patterns of natural hazards, in space and time, to establish the
context in which mountain hydroclimatic hazards are experienced.
Mountain Hazards
Twenty years ago concerns arose about the perceived effects of upper basin
deforestation, e.g., in Nepal, on catastrophic flood disasters in the Ganges River basin
downstream as far as Bangladesh, which are analogous to current concerns about
Himalayan glaciers. A team of mountain scientists began to question these perceptions,
and compiled a volume titled The Himalayan Dilemma: Reconciling Development and
Conservation (Ives and Messerli, 1989). Research in The Himalayan Dilemma marshaled
evidence that shed new light on processes of deforestation in the headwaters, refuted
popular notions of mountain peoples’ responsibility for lower basin flooding, and
refocused attention on mesoscale relationships among land use, land cover, flood hazards,
and economic development in the mountains, foothills, and upper piedmont settlement
regions. The snow and ice hazards of concern in this report differ from the issues of
twenty years ago, for example in their attribution of responsibility to global rather than
mountain societies, but the focus on the mountains as a source of downstream hazards
invites analogies with the types of re-thinking that are needed. To what extent, and in
what ways, do the unfolding mountain snow and ice risks in the HKH region relate to
other natural hazards in the region? Five propositions may be considered:






Mountain hazards can attenuate with distance downstream;
Mountain hazards can cascade and amplify downstream (e.g., due to increased
downstream vulnerability, or “associated disasters” triggered by those upstream);
Mountain hazards can concatenate with other hazards downstream. They can:
attenuate while also being amplified by independent disasters downstream
(Butzer, 1982);
Mountain hazards can be compounded by independent disasters in different
subregions that divert relief efforts from one disaster to another; or
Mountain hazards can be eclipsed by other crises downstream.

These five scenarios defy simple generalizations across the region. They may
occur in succession with or adjacent to one another. One way of approaching them is to
examine the historical-geographic record of natural disasters in South Asia. The
following analysis gives a sense of the magnitude of mountain hazards relative to those of
the plains and coasts. It complements other discussions in this report regarding historical
and future linkages among the hazards of mountains, plains, and coasts – and it is
supported by information from a variety of disaster databases that are discussed in further
detail in Appendix D.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Environmental Risk and Security

99

Natural Disasters in South Asia
Natural disasters in South Asia can involve meteorological, hydrological, and
geophysical phenomena that are obviously not unique to the HKH region. In 2010,
hydrological disasters were more common than other types of disasters in the region
(Munich RE NatCatSERVICE2). A similar pattern is observed over the past century, as
the frequency of natural disasters in the region have been flood-dominated when
compared to other disasters (Figure 4.1), both in terms of the frequency of events and
number of people affected by the occurrence of floods (Figure 4.2). However, the number
of people killed over the past century by natural disasters was dominated by droughts and
related famines; the number of people killed by floods in the 20th century is smaller
(Figure 4.3).

FIGURE 4.1 Disasters in the South Asia region have been dominated by floods over the
past century (1900 to 2010) in Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal, and
Pakistan. SOURCE: Based on data from CRED (2011).

2

The NatCatSERVICE database is a comprehensive natural catastrophe loss database. The statement in the
text is based on statistics from this database on major global natural catastrophes in 2010 (Munich Re,
2012).

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

100

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

FIGURE 4.2 Number of people affected per event (bars; y-axis, left) and in aggregate
(black triangles; y-axis, right) over the past century (1900 to 2010) in Afghanistan,
Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal, and Pakistan. Floods have affected the most people,
while droughts have affected the most people per event. SOURCE: Based on data from
CRED (2011).
It should be underscored that these national disaster data cover entire countries in
the South Asian subcontinent over the past century, and not just the region affected by
mountain hydroclimatology. This macro-regional perspective over a century reflects the
uncertainties of aggregate data analysis. For example, the first half of the twentieth
century had several catastrophic drought and famine events in South Asia. Thus, while
the frequency of droughts and famines over the past century in the region is relatively
low (Figure 4.1), Figure 4.2 and 4.3 reflect the major impacts of these events in terms of
people affected and people killed.
Focusing on the most recent thirty-year period (i.e., the most recent climate
“normals”) provides additional insight, although the patterns and trends seem less clear.
Floods have had increasing significance in the numbers of people affected (Figure 4.4)
while earthquakes have been associated with the highest number of people killed,
including the 2005 Kashmir earthquake (Figure 4.5). On a yearly basis, the number of
people killed and displaced spiked several times over the past 30 years due to significant
flooding events such as the 2010 flood in Pakistan. People displaced in multiple countries
appeared to start increasing in the late 1990s, but then dropped. Even economic damages
seem more variable in the region than the aggregate global trend (Dartmouth Flood
Observatory, 2011).
PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Environmental Risk and Security

101

FIGURE 4.3 People killed per event (bars; y-axis, left) and in aggregate (black triangle;
y-axis, right) by type of hazard over the past century (1900 to 2010) in Afghanistan,
Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal, and Pakistan. Droughts and related famines have
killed the most people in the region both in aggregate and per event. SOURCE: Based on
data from CRED (2011).
Examining flood hazards over the past 25 years as they occur in the Dartmouth
Flood Observatory Database (Appendix D) provides additional insight. Several patterns
stand out: first, the frequency of reported events is increasing; second, a significant
number of these events are two-country and presumably transboundary events, which is
relevant for this study; but third, deaths and damages do not exhibit clear trends in
individual countries. These observations raise questions about the extent to which
increased frequency and impacts are a function of improved disaster reporting, changes in
human exposure, and/or changes in vulnerability. Thus, while the above analysis brings
forth information about the occurrence of natural hydroclimatic hazards in the region,
interpreting these data needs to be framed with additional points, including:



the number of people in risk zones has increased with population growth;
the number of people affected by floods may be due to an increasing number of
vulnerable people and increasing vulnerability of those people (e.g., by pressures
to settle in hazardous floodplain and hillslope areas);

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

102

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

FIGURE 4.4 People affected per event (bars, y-axis, left) and in aggregate (black
triangles; y-axis, right) by type of hazard over the past thirty years in Afghanistan,
Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal, and Pakistan. In recent years, floods have been
increasingly important in terms of the number of people affected. SOURCE: Based on
data from CRED (2011).



increasing flood hazards may be associated with land degradation in some
settlements and watersheds; and
the region is experiencing an increased reporting of disaster events.3
Mountain Environmental Hazards: An Examination of Nepal

To gain a more specific sense of mountain environmental hazards it is useful to
examine Nepal. Nepal has the highest proportion of mountainous terrain among countries
in the region, and thus the most pervasive exposure to and experience with mountain
hazards. It is also the one country in the region that has a detailed national disaster
database examining hazards by types and sub-regions, maintained by the Global
Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction (GAR)4 and described further in
3

The last of these issues is partially addressed by data on losses per event. The other uncertainties are wellrecognized, though increased awareness has not yet led to more explanatory database development.
4
Available at: http://www.preventionweb.net/english/hyogo/gar/2011/en/what/ddp.html and
http://www.desinventar.net/DesInventar/profiletab.jsp?countrycode=np.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Environmental Risk and Security

103

FIGURE 4.5 People killed per event (bars; y-axis, left) and in aggregate (black triangles;
y-axis, right) by type of hazard over the past thirty years in Afghanistan, Bangladesh,
Bhutan, India, Nepal, and Pakistan. In recent years, earthquakes have been have been
associated with the highest number of people killed, mostly due to the 2005 Kashmir
earthquake. SOURCE: Based on data from CRED (2011).
Appendix D. In this database, as in global ones, the frequency of disasters reported has
increased from the 1990s onward, so looking at the impacts per disaster variable is
important.5
While the number of people killed by natural hazards in Nepal over the past 40
years has increased, the number of people killed per disaster has decreased somewhat.
This could, in part, be due to improvements in medical care and disaster response. The
number of people affected (in aggregate and per disaster) increased in the same time
period albeit with differently timed peaks and trends in response to specific events.6
However, estimated economic damages increased from the 1990s onward in an obvious
trend (Figure 4.6) reflecting the same global trend.

5

It is worth noting that the GAR database does not separate Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) from
the aggregate flood data.
6
Analysis is based on data from the GAR database from 1971 to 2009.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

104

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Figure 4.6 Estimated damages per event (bars; y-axis, left) and in aggregate (black
triangles; y-axis, right) from natural hazards in Nepal in local currency by year (1971 to
2009). Estimated economic damages increased from the 1990s onward. SOURCE: Based
on data from GAR (2011).
A sub-regional breakdown of disaster frequency, analysis of losses of life, and
damages by disaster type in Nepal indicates that:
 damages are highest in the more populated central and eastern regions (Figure
4.7);
 losses of life are cumulatively highest from floods and landslides, though
individual earthquakes have had some of the highest mortality rates;
 droughts have limited recorded impact as compared with other countries in South
Asia; and
 fires and floods have caused some of the greatest economic losses.
When contemplating these points, several important questions occur: How do the
different countries of South Asia address these types of mountain hazards? Do low
frequency-high mortality disasters such as earthquakes have greater impact on disaster
policy in the region than higher-frequency lower-magnitude flood hazards? How do
societies address multiple-hazards and transboundary hazards, including those in
lowlands that may compound or eclipse mountain hazards? To consider these types of
questions, the next section shifts from historical disaster data to current disaster risk
reduction programs at the international and national levels.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Environmental Risk and Security

105

FIGURE 4.7 Number of people affected, number of people killed, and estimated damages
(in $Local millions) for the five regions of Nepal, in aggregate for events occurring
between 1971 and 2009. Number of people affected, number of people killed, and
estimated damages are all highest in the more populated central and eastern regions.
SOURCE: Based on data from GAR (2011).
Natural Disaster Mitigation, Management, and Response
It is important to consider the efforts that focus on natural hazards and disaster
risk reduction in South Asia, as they offer different perspectives on and approaches to
natural hazards across the region. This can also be useful when considering the specific
impacts of glacial and snowmelt processes in the region. A variety of national, regional,
and international intergovernmental organizations and programs, and national disaster
agencies exist that are relevant to this discussion. Each has differing missions, emphasis,
and resources and thus different strengths and weaknesses in this context. Furthermore,
geopolitical issues and governance structure have variable bearing on disaster
management and response in the region. (For a more detailed discussion of these
programs, see Appendix D.)
As a whole, regional organizations7 give particular emphasis to international
cooperation, information sharing, and capacity building. One important aspect of these
7

Regional organizations discussed further in Appendix D include: Asian Disaster Preparedness Centre
(Bangkok); Asian Disaster Reduction and Response Network (Kuala Lumpur); Duryog Nivaran
(Colombo); ICIMOD: Integrated Water and Hazard Management Programmes (Kathmandu); SAARC –

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

106

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

regional programs is their increasing emphasis on linking climate change with disaster
risk reduction. Another important observation is that increasing emphasis on communitybased approaches and on capacity building by these organizations is creating an
international professional cadre of regional disaster risk reduction expertise.
In addition to the military role in disaster relief in each country, national disaster
management agencies are key sources of planning, coordination, and information on
hazards management.8 Most have had limited resources and capacity until recently, but
that has tended to change in the wake of high-magnitude events.9 This is particularly the
case in India, which is scaling up its public disaster management institutions and research
centers (c.f., Kapur, 2009, 2010).
The governance structures of nation-states have an important bearing on disaster
management and response. In more centralized systems like Bhutan, the national agency
has primary jurisdiction, authority, and capacity. In parliamentary federal systems of
government such as India and Pakistan, by comparison, states may have primary or
concurrent jurisdiction, with support from national agencies to address disasters that are
beyond their capacity.
Federal systems and their states can undergo processes of devolution or
centralization over time that in turn can affect disaster response. In Pakistan, for example,
devolution to local governments a decade ago has been replaced by devolution to
provincial governments under the 18th Amendment to the Constitution of 1973 (an
Amendment passed in 2010). Under that Amendment, many national agencies have been
dissolved, and their authority devolved to provincial governments. For example, the
Ministry of Environment, which might have advanced a national climate change policy,
was devolved in 2011. The National Disaster Management Authority continues to operate
at the federal level with an approach for devolving responsibilities to the provinces.
Within this changing context, in March 2012 the federal cabinet division of Pakistan
approved a national climate change policy, a new Ministry of Climate Change, and
participation in the flood information program of the international Indus hydrology
program convened by ICIMOD (KHK-HYCOS; Ghumman, 2012). It seems reasonable
to consider in each country how policies for disaster risk reduction in the context of
hydroclimatic and institutional change may be implemented. However, it is also
reasonable to state that the general situation is one of uncertainty at the national level.
Although international, national, and state organizations are important, most
disaster victims are rescued and assisted by their family members, neighbors, and local
communities. This is particularly the case in remote and rural areas, whereas in urban
disasters, reconstruction has historically been financed in part by national and external
sources of capital as well (Vale and Campanella, 2005). The 2005 Kashmir earthquake
marked an important benchmark for mobilization at multiple scales for mountain disaster
relief (e.g., Halvorson and Hamilton, 2010).
Disaster Knowledge Network (New Delhi); and the U.N. ESCAP (Bangkok) Committee on Disaster Risk
Reduction.
8
National agencies discussed further in Appendix D include: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India,
Nepal, and Pakistan.
9
Resource allocation trends can be assessed through national budgets and plans at annual and interannual
time scales. Although economic analysis of this sort was not conducted for this report, expansion of
government programs was evident on disaster agency websites over the course of the study.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Environmental Risk and Security

107

Non-governmental organizations have supported and helped shape an array of
local, community-based approaches to disaster risk reduction in South Asia (see
Appendix D for further discussion). Appraising the traditional coping and adaptive
capacity of local organizations and communities, and the evolving efficacy of social
media, cell phone, and humanitarian logistics technologies in modernizing regions are
vital tasks (e.g., Gupta, A. K. et al., 2010; IUCN, 2008). These technologies can provide
people with very quick and accurate information about highly local conditions, facilitate
mobilization and collaboration at different scales, and immediately connect affected
people and their needs to friends and families. They can, however, also permit
misinformation to circulate quickly and widely. Moreover, inexpensive and widespread
access can result in systems being overwhelmed unless there is concomitant development
of multi-scale redundant social and information infrastructure for hazards mitigation,
warning, emergency management, and vulnerability reduction.
Implications for Snow and Ice Hydroclimatic Hazards in South Asia
As in The Himalayan Dilemma, the greatest vulnerability of mountain snow and
ice hydrology hazards is for mountain people and their immediate downstream neighbors.
Disasters are most severe at their source – that is, mountain and hillslope (e.g., terai)
communities are most at risk from blizzards, snow avalanche, glacial retreat, GLOFs, and
related geophysical extremes. At the same time, upland communities are presumably
adapted to historical ranges of hydroclimatic variability, and the more remote
communities have historically received limited assistance from the state (Macchi, 2011).
For example, Kreutzmann et al. (2000) document impressive examples of cooperative
water management across the Hindu Kush, Karakorum, and Himalayan ranges. They
underscore the changes in mountain human-environment relations brought about by
transportation, tourism, and socio-economic development that reduce some risks while
amplifying others (cf., also Derbyshire and Fort, 2006).
Physical impacts of mountain floods tend to attenuate with distance from the
source, but local losses can increase as they encounter concentrations of downstream
people and property at risk (e.g., in the district and provincial centers in mountain and
foothills regions). Headwaters flood events can also concatenate and compound with
other hydroclimatic hazards. For example, with monsoon rainfall on the plains as
occurred in the massive 2010 Indus basin floods in Pakistan, or with coastal cyclones in
Bangladesh and eastern India. The spatial extent and magnitude of these lowland
disasters can eclipse more localized hazards in mountain areas. Another open question is
how large drought losses on the plains may be affected by future temporal variability and
regional trends in snow and ice hydrology.
Management of these types of situations can be confounded by several groups of
factors. First, there are sometimes perverse incentives that constrain efforts to attenuate or
eliminate the adverse consequences of the physical impacts of mountain floods. Upstream
flood control or flood management actions produce downstream benefits that are public
goods in the sense that those downstream benefits cannot be withheld from those who
refuse to pay for them. This means that there is reluctance to invest in upstream flood
control works and schemes because the full returns from them cannot be captured

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

108

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

(Ostrom, 1990). Such disincentives need to be surmounted by some form of collective
action which may not always be easily negotiated or constituted precisely because they
would eliminate the benefits to so-called free-riders. The problems of securing collective
action may be particularly vexing in international and other transboundary situations.
A second confounding element stems from human vulnerability that is in many
ways a function of exposure and sensitivity which in turn are linked to structural
inequalities and inequitable power relations among ethnic, gender, and class groups in a
society (Wisner et al., 2003). These relationships vary over temporal and across spatial
scales Short-term disaster effects are most acute and long-lasting in local areas of rapid
onset disasters and deep social vulnerability, as in flash flood impacts on poor mountain
floodplain occupants. As noted above, local events may attenuate, cascade, or
concatenate over time; they may be compounded or eclipsed by larger-scale regional
socio-economic processes. For example, the short-term impacts of flooding in one
growing season can be offset by the following crop (see Government of Pakistan, 2012
for Pakistan and Yu et al., 2010 for Bangladesh). Long-term macro-economic disaster
impacts are in part a function of country size: small countries like Nepal and Bhutan may
have proportionately larger and longer-term socioeconomic impacts than larger countries
such as India (Noy, 2009).
Modernization and globalization may reduce losses of life and long-term
macroeconomic impacts of disasters, particularly when they include strong hazards
mitigation policies (World Bank, 2010b). However, they can also increase the numbers of
people affected and the economic damages they face. Macroeconomic disasters that stem
from other causes can also increase vulnerability to hazards in and from the Himalayan
region, especially for the poor and marginalized, upstream and down.
Multi-method and all-hazards research over multiple spatial and temporal scales
will thus be increasingly important for analyzing these widening issues (e.g., Gearheard
et al., 2011). New methods that are rapidly transforming the timeliness and efficacy of
warning, evacuation, and relief include hydrometeorological services for flood warning
(Hallegate, 2012; ICIMOD, 2012a); mass messaging (Coyle, 2005); near-real-time
disaster GIS mapping and remore sensing (ReliefWeb, 2012); real-time evaluation and
adjustment (ALNAP, 2012); civil-military coordination and the expanding humanitarian
logistics cluster (Logistics Cluster, 2012).
Perspectives on Vulnerability and Risk of Natural Disasters
The preceding sections have discussed the physical and human dimensions of
hydroclimatic hazards in the wider Himalayan region.
These processes cannot be forecast on interannual or decadal time scales with any
level of confidence at present, but they pose credible risks that can be analyzed with basic
methods of scenario and sensitivity analysis (Wescoat and Leichenko, 1992; Yu et al.,
2010). Returning to the natural hazards propositions outlined above, it is important to
anticipate and explore alternative perspectives on compound physical and social
processes that can amplify individual hazards. These could include combinations of high
snowfall years with high temperatures, rapid runoff, and major monsoon storms in the
foothills – as occurred in the Indus basin floods of 2010 in Pakistan (Asian Development

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Environmental Risk and Security

109

Bank and World Bank, 2010; OCHA, 2010). A glacial lake could breach and cascade
downstream triggering river channel change, levee failure, and inundation, e.g., on the
Kosi River alluvial fan or Indus River main stem (Hewitt, 1983). High flows in the
Ganges/Brahmaputra basin could coincide with large scale processes of sedimentation,
erosion, and coastal storm surge.
These complex geophysical events may become more common than isolated
single-variable extremes, and require greater research and planning attention. Moreover,
they always coincide with social processes that create, amplify, and/or mitigate
environmental security risks (Wisner et al., 2003).
As illuminated throughout this report, to anticipate future hydroclimatic hazards
and disasters in the Himalayan region three major challenges need to be addressed: 1)
high levels of different types of uncertainties about the measurement, modeling,
forecasting, explanation, and capacity for reducing and responding to future hazards; 2)
high levels of spatio-temporal variability in hazards losses at multiple scales; and 3)
alternative frameworks for understanding social vulnerability and resilience. This section
briefly describes these challenges, reviews a progression of models for addressing them,
and analyzes several lines of evidence as first steps along what needs to become a long
path of scientific inquiry, policy development, and effective hazards mitigation for the
peoples and places that face these risks.
Himalayan hydroclimatology encompasses all of the forms of uncertainty
described in the NRC report on Risk Analysis in Flood Damage Reduction Studies (NRC,
2003b). When these uncertainties of data, models, and knowledge are aggregated—and
when analogous uncertainties of social processes and damage datasets are included – they
raise profound questions about the prospects for long-term scenario-driven simulation, let
alone forecasting, of future hazards.
This is not to dismiss scenario analysis, but rather to say that it must be
complemented by other types of risk assessment and risk reduction. In the field of
scenario analysis, the IPCC has recently summarized the state of scientific evidence,
agreement, and perceived likelihood of extreme events and losses associated with climate
change at the global and regional scales (IPCC, 2012; Climate and Development
Knowledge Network, 2012). Selected trends and projections relevant for this report
include:






Climate extremes and impacts: a) medium confidence in a warming trend in daily
temperature extremes over much of Asia; b) low to medium confidence that
droughts will intensify; c) limited to moderate evidence regarding “changes in the
magnitude and frequency of floods at regional scales”, low agreement, and low
confidence regarding these changes.
Disaster losses: a) high confidence about increasing economic losses; b) high
confidence that losses as a proportion of GDP are greater in small and middleincome countries; c) high confidence that increased exposure of population and
settlements has been the major cause for increasing losses; and medium
confidence that future economic losses related to climate extremes will be
socioeconomic in nature.
Disaster Management and Adaptation to Past Events: a) high confidence about
the major role of exposure and vulnerability; b) high confidence about the

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

110

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security





aggravating impact of flawed development practices and policies; c) high
agreement about the inadequacy of local disaster data for vulnerability reduction;
d) high agreement about the aggravating effects of socioeconomic inequalities on
adaptation; e) high agreement about the need for humanitarian relief in small and
less-developed countries; f) high agreement about the importance of post-disaster
opportunities for increasing adaptive capacity through long-term planning and
reconstructions; and g) medium confidence about the role of risk sharing
mechanisms at multiple scales; and h) high agreement about the need for
integrated disaster risk management, climate adaptation, and development.
Future Climate Extremes, Impacts, and Disaster Losses: a) very likely that heat
waves will increase in most regions; b) likely that heavy precipitation events will
increase; c) likely that tropical cyclone wind speeds will increase but that cyclone
frequencies may decrease or remain unchanged; d) low confidence in future
drought projections; e) low confidence in future flood projections at a regional
scale; f) high confidence that current coastal hazards would be aggravated by
future sea level rise; g) low confidence in projections of changes in monsoons.
Human Impacts and Disaster Losses: a) high confidence that climate change
could seriously affect water systems; b) medium confidence that socioeconomic
factors will be the main drivers of future losses; c) medium agreement that future
climate extremes would affect population mobility and relocation (IPCC, 2012).

These conclusions indicate the currently limited ability to project future hazards
losses, or resilience in quantitative terms, especially at local to regional scales or on
timescales on the order of decades; and at the same time, increasing scientific agreement
about the types of hazards likely to be faced in different contexts in qualitative terms.
This combination of findings underscores the importance of examining a broad range of
historical evidence, current plans, and plausible analogies for anticipating possible
futures.
One approach focuses on “critical water problems” as currently defined and asks
how past variability, climate change scenarios, and plausible future hazards such as the
probable maximum flood affect the range of future choices for redefining and addressing
those critical water problems (Brown, 2012; Wescoat, 1991). Comparing losses in one
place, time, and context with the current situation in another context, and with a range of
possible futures in other places can benefit from the analysis of hydroclimatic “analogues
and analogies” (Glantz, 1998; Meyer, 1998). For example, Hewitt (1983) examines the
historical record of flood disasters on the Indus, including a 19th century GLOF event that
cascaded into the middle reaches of the river within a human ecological framework for
assessing the changing character of disaster losses and management, which can be useful
for water managers today. One issue with such an approach is whether contemporary
social structures, populations, and capacities have useful working historical analogues.
Impacts from the Attabad landslide-impounded lake in the Hunza Valley of
northern Pakistan in 2010 were vastly compounded by monsoon rains in northern plains
later that year, which cascaded in river flooding downstream to the delta. The latter event
eclipsed the former, and disrupted relief supply chains as well as funding for resettlement
and reconstruction. The 2011 monsoon, by comparison, was normal in the northern plains
but caused severe rainfall damages in the lower delta. Analysis of the similarities,

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Environmental Risk and Security

111

differences, comparability, and linkages among these damage and recovery processes—
as well as their implications for future disaster risk reduction policies and programs at
different scales—is still underway. Independent of these events, however, disaster
management is being devolved along with many other federal ministries to the provincial
level of government, which will make analogies, vis-à-vis strict comparability, between
past and future hazards all the more important.
Two major advances in disaster research in recent years have focused on
vulnerability and resilience (Adger, 2006; Cutter, 2006; Cutter et al., 2010).
“Vulnerability” can be as much a characterization of potential future losses, as it is an
assessment of documented historical losses. When used as a planning or policy concept,
“resilience” can also be projective, imagining alternative pathways for relief, recovery,
reconstruction, and mitigation.
Insight into these possible futures can be gleaned in part from critical research on
historical and contemporary hazards. For example, Kapur (2009, 2010) has prepared
major reviews of disaster research and policy in India that documents the rich cultural
heritage of ideals and practices for adjusting to hazards, while lamenting the belated
development of modern hazards research and policies in the late-20th century. Those
studies indicated the highest levels of vulnerability in the extreme northeast and
northwest districts of India (e.g., Arunachal Pradesh and Ladakh, due primarily to
inadequate infrastructure and access to services), followed by subareas of northern
Bengal, Bihar, and Uttar Pradesh (due more to disadvantaged groups and fragile living
conditions). Recent Indus basin hazards research has likewise shed light on conditions of
social vulnerability related to unequal and marginalizing power relations that have been
driving forces of past, present, and likely future losses (e.g., Halvorson, 2003; Mustafa
and Wrathall, 2011).
Resilience research focuses on the complementary processes of coping, recovery,
and reconstruction. In physical terms, the concept of resilience draws upon ecosystem
and systems analysis by analyzing the time required for human-environmental systems to
rebound to their pre-disaster status; in recent years, however, the definition of resilience
has been expanded to include the possibility of learning, reorganizing, and redeveloping
into an improved state in the longer term. However, much more is intended in the hazards
field where resilience also connotes preparedness, capacity-building, and ways for
“building back better” in the future. For application across South Asia, Moench and Dixit
(2004) provide an array of examples in an edited volume on Adaptive Capacity and
Livelihood Resilience: Adaptive Strategies for Responding to Floods and Droughts in
South Asia. Other studies of community-based planning methods for multi-hazards
resilience in the HKH mountains can serve as blueprints for future planning, as well as
assessments of past losses (e.g., ICIMOD, 2012b; Interworks LLC, 2010).
In light of these critical perspectives on patterns of vulnerability, challenges of
resilience, and the limitations of historically technocratic approaches to hazards
mitigation in South Asia, it is also worth mentioning here the perspective of sociologist
Ulrich Beck on “risk societies”. Beck (1992, 2009) argues that developed countries in the
west have placed ever-increasing emphasis on risk, but not on its root causes (e.g.,
poverty, social inequality, governance failures, domination and marginalization of some
groups by others, etc.). These “risk societies” are destined to be evermore anxious about
and adept at managing symptomatic, sometimes catastrophic, losses, but not in ways that

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

112

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

dramatically reduce the driving causes and experience of vulnerability. Under conditions
of uncertainty, governments may prefer a combination of decentralizing risk towards the
individual and the private sector and then paying for rescues and bailouts when required,
as opposed to a society-wide strategy of building resilient capacity and safety nets. The
economics and the political economy of these options require further attention, because at
almost any given point in time, building resilience may seem like the more expensive,
and hence less politically attractive, choice.
In assessing the hydroclimatic risks of the Himalayan region, it seems vital to
understand regional traditions, adaptation, and innovations for addressing the root causes
of climate, water, and food insecurity (Moench and Gyawali, 2008; Ul Haq, 2007), as
well as the frontiers of international scientific and technical risk management. An area
that is understudied and perhaps of critical value is understanding local adaptation and
innovation, and hence what local mechanisms could be supported and scaled up, and
additionally, which actions at different scales may actually be counterproductive when
viewed from a broader perspective and should therefore be replaced.
SECURITY DYNAMICS AND WATER CONFLICT
Although water conflict per se has historically been kept within bounds, the
region is characterized by a high level of risk for political security problems, compared to
other parts of the world. It has a mixture of political regimes ranging from strongly and
consistently democratic (India) to strongly and consistently autocratic (China), with many
regimes (Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Nepal, and Pakistan) exhibiting high levels of
instability in their domestic political systems and failing to consolidate as either strongly
democratic or autocratic. Regime type may be a significant variable conditioning war
proneness, with evidence suggesting that emerging or unconsolidated democracies (e.g.,
Afghanistan and Nepal) may be particularly vulnerable to initiating conflict (Gartzke,
2007; Krain and Myers, 1997; Mansfield and Snyder, 2005).
The region also has several ongoing international security problems. China, India,
and Pakistan have nuclear weapons, with India and Pakistan doing so primarily as part of
an international rivalry involving each other. The China-India border is under dispute,
with territory in Aksai Chin and Arunachal Pradesh claimed by both countries; a war was
fought in 1962 over this territory. India and Pakistan also contest their border, with
conflicting claims to Kashmir; they have engaged in military conflicts over this border in
1947 and 1948 at partition, and in 1965 and 1999. The two countries maintain a military
presence on the Siachen Glacier and have engaged in armed combat there. Afghanistan
and Nepal are both emerging from war and in a fragile peace-building phase in which the
probability of conflict recurrence is significant. Collier et al. (2003) provide extensive
statistical data showing that past conflict is a good predictor of future conflict. Past
conflict combined with growing environmental stress may be a particularly volatile
combination (Collier, 2007).
As the twenty-first century unfolds, concerns over the real and imagined risks of
conflict over environmental problems and access to resources have risen on the global list

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Environmental Risk and Security

113

of security challenges (e.g., Deudney and Matthew, 1999; Homer-Dixon, 1999)10. These
concerns now include the area of water resources, requiring experts and policymakers to
consider and evaluate the connections between water resources and conflict – and to do
so against the backdrop of existing political and security risks and vulnerabilities. Water
supply and treatment in modern and developing countries is dependent on complex water
infrastructure. Yet access to reliable water is vulnerable to disruptions from intentional
human actions or from changes in natural conditions, including climatic changes. In the
HKH region, water resources are already a scarce and valuable resource in many
communities. Because water is such a fundamental resource for human and economic
welfare, threats to water availability and water management systems or conflicts over
access to water need to be viewed with concern, and care taken to both understand and
reduce those risks (c.f., the various perspectives of Falkenmark, 1990; GCISC, 2007;
Gleick, 1993, 2000, 2006; Lal, 2011; Michel, D. and Pandya, 2009; Moench, 2010;
Monirul Qader Mirza and Ahmad, 2005; Postel, 2000; Postel and Wolf, 2001; Ringler et
al., 2010; Swain, 2004; Uprety and Salman, 2011; Yu, 2010). Such conflicts can occur at
international, subnational, and local levels.
Political boundaries rarely coincide with watershed boundaries, often bringing
politics into water policy. Indeed, approximately half of the land area of the planet is in
an “international river basin” – shared by two or more nations (Wolf, A. T., 2007), and
almost all of the watersheds of the HKH region are international in nature.
At the international scale, water disputes are often addressed at the political and
diplomatic level, and water can be an effective source of international cooperation and
negotiation through bilateral or multilateral treaty agreements or standards of
international law. Hundreds of water treaties have been negotiated and implemented
around the world (Oregon State University, 2012b). Wolf (2007) argues that these are
often highly effective at reducing the risks of water conflicts, although few of these
agreements have incorporated new concerns that might be caused by climatic changes or
other pressures. Moreover, the overwhelming majority of agreements were crafted at a
time when the world population was much smaller and there were far fewer states and
other political actors. Most bargaining theory suggests that strong and effective
agreements are more difficult to reach as the number of actors increases (e.g., Oye,
1986).
There have been a range of promising multi-track initiatives that focus on
transboundary water issues in South Asia (c.f., the various perspectives of Asha, 2012;
Bandyopadhyay and Ghosh, 2009; Crow and Singh, 2008; Gyawali, 2011; Iyer, 2003,
2007; Jinnah Institute, 2012; Moench and Dixit, 2004; Verghese, 2007). These have
broadened in scope and significance over time, with the leadership of influential water
experts from the region. Their effect on relationships and negotiations is difficult to
discern, but has potential in light of the substantial water policy experience, public
intellectual, and civil society roles of leading participants.
Cooley et al. (2012) argue that even in areas with a precedent of cooperation,
population growth, economic factors, and climate change could increase tensions over
water. As they note:

10

These authors were pioneers in raising the issue of possible links between conflict and the environment,
but the issue remains one of active debate in the literature.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

114

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

For countries whose watersheds and river basins lie wholly within their own
political boundaries, adapting to increasingly severe climate changes will be
difficult enough. When those water resources cross borders, bringing in multiple
political entities and actors, sustainable management of shared water resources in
a changing climate will be especially difficult (Cooley et al., 2012).
There are clear needs for regionally coordinated planning for water sharing,
management, and storage in the HKH region. Yet the political, economic and social
conditions in various countries and places have historically impeded such integrated
planning and management. Upstream countries such as China and India have
implemented and proposed dam projects, for instance, that affect the timing and amount
of flow to downstream countries such as Pakistan and Bangladesh. Even the sharing of
data on water faces political constraints; the Indus Waters Treaty provides for data
exchange (Article VI), though some data remain classified by countries or otherwise not
available for regional analysis or use. With a few partial exceptions, such as the Indus
River Treaty signed over half a century ago,11 countries in the region have not had a
history of working together on shared problems. And, even that treaty is the subject of
considerable tension between India and Pakistan these days. Recent failed discussions,
such as over the Wullar Barrage (see Bhutta, Z., 2011), suggest that tensions are far from
being managed completely effectively. Climate change adds another complex layer of
stress to this and other treaties. As noted above, however, the Indus Waters Treaty has
provisions for exchange of data (Article VI) and future cooperation (Article VII) that
have considerable potential. Although Nepal alone has four treaties with India,12 those
agreements do not say anything about climate changes or address the uncertainty posed
by potential effects of changing melt dynamics from glaciers of the HKH. However,
Bhutan and India have a longstanding agreement for co-financing and benefits dating
back to the Chukka Power Plant. It will be interesting to see whether and how emerging
international private and public-private power investment agreements in the region
address hydroclimatic variability (see discussions in World Bank, 2008 and USAID,
2012, which examine power trade potential and constraints among Bhutan, India, Nepal
[the so-called “eastern” market] and also Afghanistan and Pakistan [the “western”
market]) Bangladesh and India established a treaty on sharing Ganges water in 1996,
which superseded less formal agreements. They recently set aside a proposed treaty to
share the waters of the Teesta River but that was reportedly due to federal-state politics in
India (India Water Review, 2011). Another difficulty with many of the treaties in the
11

With extensive irrigation systems, the Indus River basin was already the subject of contested water
management by Indian states when the new countries of India and Pakistan were created in 1947. In April
1948, India cut off water to several major canals, However, this was followed by extended negotiations
under the auspices of the World Bank and a consortium of donors, leading to the Indus River Treaty of
1960 (Michel, A. A., 1967; Wolf, A.T. and Newton, 2008). Indus Waters Treaty provisions for
appointment of a neutral expert (Annexure F) and an international court of arbitration (Annexure G) have
recently been tested. The full text of the treaty is available at:
http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/COUNTRIES/SOUTHASIAEXT/0,,contentMDK:20320
047~pagePK:146736~piPK:583444~theSitePK:223547,00.html.
12
The Kosi River agreements of 1954, 1966, and 1978, and the Gandak Power Project agreement of 1959
(Hamner and Wolf, 1998). The full text of the agreements are available at:
http://ocid.nacse.org/tfdd/treaties.php.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Environmental Risk and Security

115

region is that they do not include all riparians.13 For example, the Indus Treaty does not
include Afghanistan (the Kabul River is a tributary of the Indus). The Ganges Treaty with
Bangladesh does not include Nepal.
Other important factors related to climate risks are left out of almost all
international water agreements as well. Groundwater is typically ignored or excluded,
and for India and Pakistan, finding a way to manage transboundary groundwater may be
a critical issue. Many agreements that address water allocations do so using fixed
volumetric allocations rather than proportional or percentage allocations, and they
typically are inflexible in the face of shortages. Few agreements include standards for
water quality. Many transboundary agreements lack monitoring, enforcement, and
conflict resolution procedures. Overcommitment of river waters leads to disputes; a 2007
assessment included the Indus River in the list of rivers that are “severely
overcommitted”14 (Molle et al., 2007) This points again to the need for flexibility in any
water management agreements, as stated above. The Indus agreement, however, does at
least divide the river entirely by tributary, and the Ganges agreement has varying
allocations depending on flow.
Fischhendler (2004), McCaffrey (2003), and Tarlock (2000) identify some
mechanisms that can add flexibility in the face of climate change to existing treaties, and
Cooley et al. (2012) extend these mechanisms. Among the leading recommendations are:






Address how water allocations can be made more flexible in the face of altered
timing and availability of flows;
Incorporate water quality provisions;
Develop explicit water management strategies for extreme events, including
floods and droughts;
Provide clear amendment and review processes for changing conditions; and
Create joint institutions to facilitate adaptation to climate change, including
technical Committees and shared models and data.

Recently, Chellaney (2011) has suggested that the extensive technical boards and
task forces, public engagement processes, and voting procedures employed by the
International Joint Commission between Canada and the United States offer promising
precedents for expanding the scope, capability, and efficacy of the presently small
bilateral treaty commissions in South Asia (cf., Article VIII of the Indus Waters Treaty
on the Permanent Indus Commission, in which Article VIII (10) states that “the
Commission shall determine its own procedures,” as well as Article VII on “Future
Cooperation,” which support the view that there is flexibility even in the most detailed
agreements).
Similarly, Wolf et al. (2008) provide analyses of international water agreements,
including historical details, the principal actors, and “lessons learned” about the
resolution of conflicts. The major lessons learned from the Indus River Treaty case study
(Oregon State University, 2012a), for example, include:
 Power inequities may delay the pace of negotiations;
13

A riparian area is the area along a river bank.
India’s Cauvery River, not part of this study and not fed by glacier melt, has also been the subject of
dispute because of over allocation.

14

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

116

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security







Positive, active, and continuous involvement of a third party is vital in helping to
overcome conflict;
Coming to the table with financial assistance can provide sufficient incentive for a
breakthrough in agreement;
Some points may be agreed to more quickly if it is explicitly agreed that a
precedent is not being set;
Shifting political boundaries can turn intra-national disputes into international
conflicts, exacerbating tensions over existing issues;
Sensitivity to each party’s particular hydrologic concerns is crucial in determining
the bargaining mix; and
In particularly “hot” conflicts, when political concerns override, a sub-optimal
solution may be the best one can achieve.

Other considerations include designing upstream interventions that minimize downstream
impacts and the importance of advance notice about such interventions.
Extensive research and policy discussions around water security have also taken
place within the countries of South Asia. In India, for example, analysts have suggested
that water issues with Pakistan and China have the potential to become catalysts for
conflict, but that political deadlocks with Nepal and Bangladesh could be broken through
sensible water sharing arrangements and resource development (IDSA, 2010).15 Within
Pakistan, it has been suggested that while Kashmir is the major source of tension between
the two countries, discord over several upstream river projects being constructed by India
has the potential to provoke increasing conflict between the two countries.
Increasingly, however, conflicts over water are not only the result of international
disputes, but are also subnational. The challenges can be even greater at the subnational
level, where frameworks and strategies for reducing conflicts over water as a
development issue are protracted (e.g., Iyer, 2003; Joy, 2008; Mohan et al., 2010).
Regional and local legal and water management institutions are often weak, and water
infrastructure can be insufficiently developed, poorly maintained, or ill-suited to needs.
Dams, for instance, are sometimes purportedly built because they are large infrastructure
projects that have symbolic, political, and financial benefits, rather than because they
solve water supply problems effectively, although there is debate about this issue (e.g.,
Briscoe and Malik, 2006; Gyawali, 2011; Iyer, 2007). Dams may also raise distributional
conflicts and spur political tension as downstream and upstream communities receive
unequal benefits, or as one community benefits at the expense of the other (Beck, M. W.
et al., 2012; Duflo and Pande, 2007).
Improvements in water management are more likely to occur at the national and
sub-national levels than the international level; therefore, a focus on management at these
levels is more likely to be successful than efforts to create optimal, region-wide
agreements. However, channels of cooperation relating to cross-boundary scientific
assessment could open up if science is seen as neutral ground and new data are regarded
as being of mutual benefit.
Table 4.1 lists selected entries from the Water Conflict Chronology (Gleick,
2011) from the HKH region through 2010. Not all of these entries involve watersheds
that derive water from glacial melt, but they are indicative of the kinds of regional
15

Malhotra (2010) provides another perspective from India on water issues.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Environmental Risk and Security

117

conflicts over water that have occurred over the past four decades and that are relevant to
this study. All but one of the 23 conflicts are national or subnational, and twenty one are
development disputes16 – although six of those twenty one also have another basis
(political tool,17 terrorism,18 or military tool19). Scarcity and unequal allocations of water
are the usual immediate causes of violence. In general, these results confirm the notion
that countries are more likely to cooperate – or at least negotiate – than to go to war over
water, but that there could be violence and instability at the sub-state level. In addition,
water may be the occasion for violence but not a sufficient basis in itself. Climate change,
accordingly, might be best thought of as a “stress multiplier”.
Table 4.1 Examples of water conflicts in the Hindu-Kush Himalayan Region (Gleick,
2011).
Date Parties Involved
Basis of Conflict
Description
1970

Chinese Citizens

Development dispute

Conflicts over excessive water
withdrawals and subsequent water
shortages from China’s Zhang River
have been worsening for over three
decades between villages in Shenxian
and Linzhou counties. In the 1970s,
militias from competing villages
fought over withdrawals. (See also
entries for 1976, 1991, 1992, and
1999.)

1976

Chinese citizens
and government

Development dispute

In 1976, a local militia chief is shot to
death in a clash over the damming of
Zhang River. Conflicts over
excessive water withdrawals and
subsequent water shortages from
China’s Zhang River have been
worsening for over three decades.
(See also entries for 1970, 1991,
1992, and 1999.)

16

“[W]here water resources or water systems are a major source of contention and dispute in the context of
economic or social development” (Gleick, 2011).
17
“[W]here water resources, or water systems themselves, are used by a nation, state, or non-state actor for
a political goal.” (Gleick, 2011).
18
“[W]here water resources, or water systems, are the targets or tools of violence or coercion by non-state
actors.” (Gleick, 2011).
19
“[W]here water resources, or water systems themselves, are used by a nation or state as a weapon during
a military action.” (Gleick, 2011).

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

118

1991

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Chinese villages
of Huanglongkou
and Qianyu

Development dispute

In December 1991, the villages of
Huanglongkou and Qianyu exchange
mortar fire over the construction of
new water diversion facilities.
Conflicts over excessive water
withdrawals and subsequent water
shortages from China’s Zhang River
have been worsening for over three
decades. (See also entries for 1970,
1976, 1992, and 1999.)

1991– Karnataka, India
present

Development dispute

Violence erupts when Karnataka
rejects an Interim Order handed down
by the Cauvery Waters Tribunal, set
up by the Indian Supreme Court. The
Tribunal was established in 1990 to
settle two decades of dispute between
Karnataka and Tamil Nadu over
irrigation rights to the Cauvery River.

1999

Bangladesh

Development dispute, Fifty are hurt during strikes called to
Political tool
protest power and water shortages,
led by former Prime Minister Begum
Khaleda Zia.

1999

China

Development dispute, Around the Lunar New Year, farmers
Terrorism
from Hebei and Henan Provinces
fight over limited water resources.
Heavy weapons, including mortars
and bombs, were used and nearly 100
villagers were injured. Houses and
facilities were damaged and the total
loss reached one million US dollars.

2000

Hazarajat,
Afghanistan

Development dispute

Violent conflicts break out over water
resources in the villages Burna Legan
and Taina Legan, and in other parts
of the region, as drought depletes
local resources.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Environmental Risk and Security

119

2000

Gujarat,
India

Development dispute

Water riots are reported in some areas
of Gujarat amidst protests against
authorities’ failure to arrange
adequate supplies of tanker water.
Police are reported to have shot into a
crowd at Falla village near Jamnagar,
resulting in the death of three and
injuries to 20 following protests
against the diversion of water from
the Kankavati dam to Jamnagar town.

2001

Pakistan

Development dispute, Long-term drought and water
Terrorism
shortages lead to civil unrest in
Pakistan. Protests begin in March and
continue into summer, leading to
riots, four bombings, 12 injuries, and
30 arrests. Ethnic conflicts erupt as
some groups “accuse the government
of favoring the populous Punjab
province (over Sindh province) in
water distribution.”

2002

Kashmir,
India

Development dispute

Two people are killed and 25 others
injured in Kashmir when police fire
at a group of clashing villagers. The
incident takes place in Garend village
in a dispute over sharing water from
an irrigation stream.

2002

Nepal

Terrorism
Political Tool

The Khumbuwan Liberation Front
(KLF) blows up a hydroelectric
powerhouse in Bhojpur District on
January 26, cutting off power to
Bhojpur and surrounding areas. By
June 2002, Maoist rebels had
destroyed more than seven microhydro projects as well as an intake of
a drinking water project and pipelines
supplying water to Khalanga in
western Nepal.

2002

Karnataka,
Tamil Nadu,
India

Development dispute

Violence continues over the
allocation of the Cauvery (Kaveri)
River between Karnataka and Tamil
Nadu, including riots, arrests,
property destruction, and more than
30 injuries.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

120

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

2004

India

Development dispute

Four people are killed in October and
more than 30 are injured in
November in ongoing protests by
farmers over allocations of water
from the Indira Gandhi Irrigation
Canal in Sriganganagar district,
which borders Pakistan. Authorities
impose curfews on the towns of
Gharsana, Raola, and Anoopgarh.

2004

China

Development dispute

Tens of thousands of farmers stage a
sit-in against the construction of the
Pubugou dam on the Dadu River in
Sichuan Province. Riot police are
deployed to quell the unrest, and one
policeman is killed. Witnesses also
report the deaths of a number of
residents. (See China 2006 for
follow-up.)

2007

India

Development dispute

Thousands of farmers breach security
and storm the area around the
Hirakud Dam in the east Indian state
of Odisha (Orissa) to protest
allocation of water to industry. Minor
injuries are reported during the
conflict between the farmers and
police.

2008

Pakistan

Terrorism

In October, the Taliban threatens to
blow up Warsak Dam, the main water
supply for the city of Peshawar
during a government offensive in the
region.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Environmental Risk and Security

121

2008

China,
Tibet

Military tool,
Development dispute

China launches a political crackdown
in Tibet. At least some observers
have noted the importance of Tibet
for the water resources of China,
though the political complications
between Tibet and China extend far
beyond water. As noted: “Tibet is
referred to in some circles as the
‘world’s water tower’ ; the Tibetan
plateau is home to vast reserves of
glaciated water, the sources of 10 of
the largest rivers in Asia, including
the Yellow, Yangtze, Mekong,
Brahmaputra, Salween, Hindus and
Sutlej among others. By some
estimates, the Tibetan plateau is the
source of fresh water for fully a
quarter of the world’s population.”

2009

India

Development dispute

On December 3, police clash with
hundreds of Mumbai residents
protesting water cuts. One man is
killed and a dozen others injured.
Mumbai authorities are faced with
rationing supplies after the worst
monsoon season in decades.

2009

India

Development dispute

A family in Madhya Pradesh state in
India is killed by a small mob for
illegally drawing water from a
municipal pipe. Others ran to collect
water for themselves before the pipe
ran out. Drought and inequality in
water distribution lead to more than
50 violent clashes in the region in the
month of May, and media reports
more than a dozen people killed and
even more injured since January,
mostly fighting over a bucket of
water.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

122

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

2009

China
and India

Military tool,
Development dispute

China claims a part of historical Tibet
that is now under Indian control as
part of the state of Arunachal
Pradesh. To influence this territorial
dispute, China tries to block a $2.9
billion loan to India from the Asian
Development Bank on the grounds
that part of this loan was destined for
water projects in the disputed area.

2010

Pakistani
tribes

Development dispute, More than 100 are dead and scores
Military tool
injured following two weeks of tribal
fighting in Parachinar in the Kurram
region of Pakistan, near the
Afghanistan border. The conflict over
irrigation water began as the
Shalozan Tangi tribe cut off supplies
to the Shalozan tribe. Some report
that the terrorist group al-Qaida may
be involved; others claim sectarian
violence is to blame as one group is
Sunni Muslim and the other Shiite.

2010

Mangal
and Tori tribes,
Pakistan

Development dispute

A water dispute in Pakistan’s tribal
region leads to 116 deaths. In early
September, the Mangal tribe stopped
water irrigation on lands used by the
Tori tribe, leading to fighting.

2010

India

Development dispute

A protest about water shortages leads
to violence. Erratic water supply, and
eventually a complete cutoff of water
in the Kondli area of Mayur Vihar in
east Delhi, causes a violent protest
and several injuries.

A similar analysis may be undertaken for the Indus and Ganges-BrahmaputraMeghna basins using the Transboundary Freshwater Dispute Database’s International
Water Events Database, which codes events reported in news sources on a 14-point scale
from -7 (formal declaration of war) to +7 (voluntary unification) from 1948 to 2008.
Although the mixed sources of records, challenges of coding them, and relationships
between reports and reality need to be considered, four rough patterns seem apparent in
these data:


No events are reported at the -7 level (formal declaration) of water war (and
only 1 or 2 are at the -6 to -4 levels of water conflict);

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Environmental Risk and Security





123

Both the Indus and the Ganges/Brahmaputra basins have a bi-modal
distribution of relatively lower levels of conflict and cooperation;
Both basins appear to have a somewhat higher frequency of cooperation than
conflict; and
There are several examples of significant international agreements (+6 level).

Each of these databases and others like them have significant limitations. They do
not, for example, convey shifts in international relations that may be associated with
major constitutional transitions, and which can include water governance, e.g., in
countries such as Nepal and Pakistan. They do however offer partial perspectives on the
types and trends of water-related conflict and cooperation.
Future Political Stresses and Water Conflicts
Traditional political and ideological questions that have long dominated
international discourse and contributed to international and subnational conflicts are now
involving other factors that were less important in the past. These include population
growth, transnational pollution, resource scarcity, and inequitable access to resources and
their use (Gleick, 1998). As the climate changes, shifts in the timing, availability, or
quality of water resources in parts of the region may play an increasing role in political
tensions, either directly through disputes over access to water, or indirectly through
changes in agricultural production and food security or other concerns.
The history of international river disputes and agreement suggests that
cooperation is a more likely outcome than violent conflict. However, the relevance of this
history may be attenuated by the dramatic increase in the number of state and non-state
actors, larger populations, changes in patterns of economic growth, and the complexity of
the challenges. Because of changes in political and social conditions, historical patterns
may not be able to provide insight into current and future challenges.
Moreover, if trends combine in especially dangerous ways, conflicts might
outstrip the ability of existing institutions to cope along normal lines, thereby escalating
national security crises. For example, major deterioration in international relations might
coincide with dramatic fluctuations in transboundary flows, rising flood risks perceived
to result from mismanagement by upstream nations, social media allowing
misperceptions to be widely diffused and used as a basis for mobilizing action regardless
of official attempts to control the narrative, or heightened conditions of general water
scarcity driven by rising demand and declining groundwater resources. Monitoring the
conditions that drive these potential situations would be worthwhile.
In addition to transboundary and international threats to security, there is a
growing risk of internal conflict over water resources. Increases in floods, especially
floods that are larger than those that have been experienced in recent history, can kill and
injure many people, destroy property and livelihoods, and pressure governments in ways
that trigger legitimacy problems. If such floods repeat in the same area over short periods,
downward spirals in livelihoods and legitimacy could occur. Similarly, water scarcity
problems – whether triggered by shifts in rainfall or runoff patterns, changes in
groundwater recharge rates and availability, or alterations in water demands – could

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

124

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

trigger similar crises if they endure over long periods in areas of significant vulnerable
populations and weak water management institutions. In addition, the threat posed by
continuing overdraft of groundwater resources may be even more important than
consequent changes in glacial melt and its contribution to the rivers of South Asia
(Darnault, 2008; Shah, 2009). Whether or not water stresses escalate into security crises
will depend in part on governmental capacity; therefore, the most dangerous situations
are those that combine high water stress and state fragility.
Some historical analysis suggests that societies can be very slow to act upon
strong signals from environmental change, resulting in breakdowns that, from an
historical vantage, are shocking (e.g., Diamond, 2004). The frequency with which
breakdowns occur due to environmental stress have led some analysts to argue that
societies should consider carefully how they will rebuild (Homer-Dixon, 2006).
Even in the absence of catastrophic events, existing water management
institutions and treaty arrangements would need to evolve in order for cooperation to be a
more likely outcome than conflict. The web of economic and social relationships in the
region has become increasingly complex and intricate, and the numbers of stakeholders
and interested parties in water resource management has multiplied. This creates new sets
of challenges for governance and stability. International treaties may also have to adopt a
more integrated ecological approach so that water issues are not considered in isolation
from the management of land, energy, and other resources. This creates a greater role for
scientific knowledge and makes international collaboration on scientific issues all the
more important.
More generally, regional – as opposed to bilateral – frameworks for resource
management may become increasingly necessary (and if robust regional governance
mechanisms emerge, then new forms of early warning and response will become
possible). Historically, large regional powers throughout the world have tended to favor
bilateral arrangements, which have been the norm, while small and medium powers have
enjoyed greater leverage within multilateral institutions (see Naidu (2009) and Singh, S.
K. (2011) for a discussion of the shift in India’s position in favor of multilateralism).
Moving forward, however, as countries such as India play a more prominent role on the
world stage, they may be increasingly willing to embrace regional and multilateral
arrangements and try, to the extent possible, to structure these institutions to their
advantage.
CONCLUSIONS
Key features of the environmental security of the HKH region were identified at
the workshop by the breakout groups on Demography and Security and Risk Factors and
Vulnerabilities. Starting from those concepts, the Committee used their expert judgment,
reviews of the literature, and deliberation to develop the following conclusions:


Natural disasters in South Asia involve meteorological, hydrological, and
geophysical phenomenon that are not unique to the HKH region. Current efforts
that focus on these natural hazards and disaster reduction in South Asia can offer

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Environmental Risk and Security














125

useful lessons when considering and addressing the potential for impacts resulting
from changes in snowmelt processes and glacier retreat in the region.
Current international datasets indicate that over the past century, natural disasters
in the region have been flood-dominated in terms of the frequency of events and
number of people affected. However, the number of people killed over the past
century by natural disasters was dominated by droughts and related famines. Over
the past thirty year period the patterns and trends are less clear. Floods have had
increasing significance in the numbers of people affected, while earthquakes have
been associated with the highest number of people killed.
Modernization and globalization may reduce losses of life and long-term
macroeconomic impacts of disasters, but they can also increase the numbers of
people affected and the economic damages.
At the regional level of disaster management, organizations give particular
emphasis to international cooperation, information sharing, and capacity building,
as well as an increasing emphasis on linking climate change with disaster risk
reduction. At the national and state level, processes of devolution or centralization
over time can affect disaster response. An increased focus on vulnerability and
resilience within the disaster research community could lead to improved disaster
management.
Changes in transboundary water flows can generate or increase conflicts of
interest among riparian countries, and these climate-induced changes will further
complicate changes driven by economic, demographic, and political factors.
Among the most serious challenges, even in the absence of climate change, are
the magnitude of conflicting demands for limited water resources, the lack of
corresponding institutional capacity to cope with such conflicts, and the current
political disputes among regional actors that complicate reaching any agreements
on resource disputes. Water management institutions need to think systematically
about integrating climate change risks in water resources policy, and they need to
function in ways that are flexible and take account of the interests of all parties.
The most dangerous situation to monitor for is a combination of state fragility
(encompassing, e.g., recent violent conflict, obstacles to economic development,
and weak management institutions) and high water stress.
Although the history of international river disputes and agreement in this region
suggests that cooperation is a more likely outcome than violent conflict, social
conditions may have changed in ways that make historical patterns less
informative about current and future challenges. Changes in the availability of
water resources may still play an increasing role in political tensions, especially if
existing water management institutions do not evolve to take better account of the
social, economic, and ecological complexities in the region. Agreements will
likely reflect existing political relations more than optimal management strategies.
Changes to the hydrologic system are inevitable and adaptation is needed at all
levels of governance. Lessons can be learned from developed countries, but these
arrangements will not operate in the same way and the time horizon for these
solutions to bear fruit might be significant. Adaptation approaches need to be
flexible enough to change with changing conditions, e.g., smaller scale and lower
cost water management systems, because of uncertainty in impacts and the

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

126

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

dynamic nature of coming changes. There is a need to think through adaptation
protocols now rather than when fear and urgency have become widespread.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

5
Conclusion
The climate and hydrology of the HKH region are changing. There are many
important uncertainties about the current state of physical and social systems in the
region in addition to the uncertainties about the future. However, not everything is
uncertain or unknown. It is important to consider the impact of glacial retreat on regional
water resources in the larger, hydroclimatic and social context of the HKH region. The
effects of climatic changes on glacier dynamics will affect both the supply and demand
for water in the Himalayan region, and these changes will, in turn, affect the vulnerability
of key populations to freshwater problems. Glacial retreat is only one factor that
contributes to changes in the hydrologic cycle, and the relative importance of glacier
meltwater varies across the region and between seasons. In most instances, the
contribution to surface water discharge of snow melt exceeds that of glacial melt. Glacier
melt does contribute to the water flow in major rivers such as the Ganges and Indus, but
for low-lying areas such as the Gangetic Plain, at much lower percentages than thought
several years ago. The effect of glacier retreat will be most evident during the dry season,
particularly in the west. In all seasons, changes in many regions are likely to be
dominated by shifts in the location, intensity, and variability of precipitation (both rain
and snow) rather than glacier retreat. Glacial meltwater is not a major contributor for
river systems to the east but is more important for river systems to the west. Kaltenborn
and Ims (2010) conclude that:
In general, the impact of melting glaciers on the seasonal distribution of river flow
is greatest where: i) ice melt occurs during a dry season; ii) glacier meltwater
flows into semi-arid areas; and/or iii) small annual temperature cycles mean that
there is little seasonal variation in snow cover. Conversely, the seasonal effect is
smaller where there is significant precipitation during the melt season, such as the
monsoonal central and eastern Himalaya.
Melting of glacial ice plays an important role in maintaining water security during
times of drought or similar climate extremes. For example, in the European Alps during
the drought year of 2003 glacial melt contributions to August discharge of the Danube
River were about three times greater than the 100 year average (Huss, 2011). Thus, water
stored as glacial ice is the region’s hydrologic “insurance,” acting as a buffer against the
hydrologic impacts brought about by a changing climate, releasing the stored water to
streams and rivers when it is most needed.
There may be normal, even increased, amounts of available melt water to satisfy
dry season needs because of the release of “insurance” water from storage in retreating
glaciers for the next several decades (Barnett et al., 2005). To illustrate, the role of glacier
wastage contributions to discharge under future warming scenarios was investigated for

127
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

128

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

three highly glacierized catchments in the Alps that have long-term climate and discharge
records (Huss et al., 2008). Annual runoff from the drainage basins shows an initial
increase which is due to the release of water from glacial storage. After some decades,
depending on catchment characteristics and the applied climate change scenario, runoff
stabilizes and then drops below the current level. Retreating glaciers of the HKH in the
short term (decadal time frame) will subsidize surface flows by melting water held in
storage, mitigating immediate losses to discharge by retreating glaciers (Kaser et al.,
2010).
As noted in Chapter 2, paleoclimate records suggest a mixed record of wetness
and dryness during the 20th century in the monsoon dominated eastern HKH and
hydrologic modeling indicates that glacial melt is not a major contribution to river
systems in the east (i.e. the Ganges, Yangtze, and the Yellow). Thus, for the eastern
HKH, these factors could result in little change to annual surface water discharge, but
could result in the loss of “insurance” water that glacial melt provides for water security
during times of drought. In the western HKH, paleoclimate records indicate a trend
toward wetter conditions in the 20th century and hydrologic models indicate that glacial
melt is much more important in the west (i.e. the Indus basin). Thus, the consequences of
climate change to water security could be large if a reduction in available surface water
either annually and/or seasonally occurs in the western HKH. However, the trend towards
wetter conditions in the western HKH confounds this assessment.
During situations such as these, groundwater, a significant amount of which is
supplied to the major river plains of the region by the Himalaya, will be looked to as a
source to offset water scarcity. Thus, water security issues for low-land populations over
the next decade are more likely to come from overdrafting of groundwater resources than
changes in discharge from retreating glaciers.
Although a greater understanding of the glaciers of the HKH region will inform
knowledge about water security in the region, improved understanding of the science of
the glaciers is itself not sufficient to answer all questions about the relationship between
the hydrology, the population, and the policies and politics of the region. As discussed in
Chapter 3, social changes are affecting water use at a greater rate than environmental
factors are affecting the availability of water. For example, rising standards of living,
including improving and changing diets and greater energy use, will have a significant
effect on water use patterns over the coming decades. Even if streamflow remains
relatively stable in the short term, human factors could lead to water scarcity. Changing
standards of living could also influence vulnerability to natural hazards. Although
economic development could reduce adverse outcomes, including loss of live, monetary
loss could increase.
A WAY FORWARD
When considering the link between humans and the environment with the context
of water security in the HKH region, four themes emerge: 1) there is significant
variability in the climate, hydrology, and glacier behavior as well as the demographics
and water use patterns of the region, 2) uncertainties exist and will continue to exist in
both the physical and social systems, 3) to reduce and respond to this uncertainty there is

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Conclusion

129

a need for improved monitoring of both the physical and social systems, and 4) in the
face of uncertainty, the most compelling need is to improve water management and
hazards mitigation systems.
Theme 1: There is significant variability in the climate, hydrology, and glacier
behavior in the region as well as the demographics and water use patterns within the
region. The retreat rates of Himalayan glaciers vary of over time and space, with the rate
of retreat being higher in the east than the west. There are confounding factors such as
dust and black carbon that will affect glacier melt and in some cases increase glacier
wastage. Changes in the monsoon will probably be more important than changes in
glacier wastage at lower, downstream elevations. Rates of urbanization vary across the
region, as does the portion of the population with access to improved water and
sanitation.
Theme 2: Uncertainties exist and will continue to exist in both the physical and
social systems. The impact of future climate change is uncertain but will probably
accelerate rates of glacier retreat. Accelerated glacier retreat rates will have significant
impacts in local, high mountain areas but will probably not be very important
downstream. As the region’s population becomes more urbanized and standards of living
change, water use patterns will also change in ways that will be difficult to predict.
Existing demographic methods to not allow for projections at sufficient spatial resolution
to determine whether, for example, certain basins and elevation zones will experience
higher rates of population growth than others and how the demographic composition of
those specific areas will change. In both the physical and social systems, stationarity – the
assumption that the systems will fluctuate within a known range of variability – will no
longer apply. In other words, the past will not be prologue, and past trends in the climate,
hydrology, glaciers, and population of the region will not be a viable guide for the future
(e.g., Milly et al., 2008).
Theme 3: To reduce and respond to this uncertainty, there is a need for improved
monitoring of both the physical and social systems. Monitoring will need to occur on a
more extensive and consistent basis. Without enhanced monitoring, the information
needed to respond to changing environmental and social conditions will be unavailable.
Monitoring and research will further understanding of both the physical and human
systems in the region, and identify the various options available to respond to change in
the face of uncertainty.
Theme 4: In the face of uncertainty, the most compelling need is to improve water
management and hazards mitigation systems. Existing patterns of water use and water
management need improvement. As discussed in Chapter 3, some progress has been
made in improved assessments in the recent past. Going forward, improved
implementation of lessons from these assessments in water policies and programs will be
necessary. Options for adapting to climate change are discussed in greater detail in the
next section. However, the people most likely to be affected by changing water security
in the south Asia are the rural and urban poor who have the least capacity to adapt to
changing environmental and social conditions and hazards. Management of groundwater
and demand-side management are among the areas where improvements can be made.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

130

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

RESEARCH AND DATA NEEDS
Anticipating future conditions in the HKH region is hindered by an incomplete
understanding of current conditions and of both the extent to which natural feedback
mechanisms will generate new equilibria and human systems will adapt to signals of
stress and change. As discussed throughout the report, many open scientific questions
remain about the physical and social systems of the region, which, if addressed, could
lead to a greater understanding. These research and data needs are presented in roughly
the same order as the topics appeared in the report and the order does not indicate
priority. These needs are critical to more fully address the questions in the Committee’s
charge.
Physical Geography: The HKH is one of the least-observed regions on Earth.
Currently available data lack the necessary spatial and temporal resolution, as well as
quality, to fully understand the region. There is a need for carefully designed surface
observing systems (including temperature, precipitation amount and type, streamflow,
glacier mass balance, glacier albedo, groundwater, paleoclimate proxies) that are
integrated with satellite observations to provide comprehensive monitoring of the region.
In addition to new data, pooling of existing data and resources, including release of
relevant classified or restricted satellite imagery or water data, and sustained international
cooperation and data-sharing are critically important to advance understanding and
reduce uncertainties. Comprehensive monitoring and data-sharing would help answer the
following questions:






Climate, Meteorology, and Aerosols: What are the roles of greenhouse gas
warming and black carbon radiative forcing on winds, temperature, precipitation
variability, and trends in the summer monsoon and mid-latitude westerlies? How
much of the regional atmospheric aerosol loading is driven by local emissions
compared to transport from remote sources? How do black carbon deposition,
snowfall, and snow turnover processes combine to affect the albedo of glaciers
and snowpack? How has the temperature in the mid- and lower troposphere
changed? How do current changes in the regional climate compare to natural
climate changes that occurred in the past? How will the monsoon change in the
future?
Glaciers: What is the relationship between climatic changes and the mass balance
of the HKH glaciers? What is the response time of individual glaciers to climate
forcing, and how does this response time vary among glaciers in the region? Have
temperature changes in the mid- and lower-troposphere affected the ELA or the
ratio of snow to rain? How does snow cover change seasonally?
Hydrology: What is the relative contribution, seasonally and annually, of glacial
wastage and meltwater to total streamflow in the major rivers of the HKH region?
What are the surface-groundwater recharge mechanisms in the region? How will
climate change affect groundwater supply? How can hydrologic data become
more widely accessible to the science and management communities? How can
remote sensing be used to in conjunction with well data to increase understanding
of groundwater in the region?

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Conclusion

131

Human Geography: Currently available demographic compositional data do not
conform to geophysical parameters and lack the necessary spatial resolution to determine
whether, for example, certain basins and/or elevation zones will experience higher rates
of population growth than others. Current understanding of water usage is poor because
of a lack of regional datasets. Remote sensing advances may address some of these
deficiencies, particularly in the plains. Improved measurement of water withdrawals from
surface water, and even more so groundwater pumping, will be crucial for developing,
monitoring, and managing regional water budgets, hazards, and stresses. As lowland
water and energy scarcity may increase demand for mountain water storage, advances in
water use analysis will have increasing importance. Improved datasets and monitoring
would help answer the following questions:




Demographics: How will populations change in areas with water scarcity as
compared to areas with sufficient water supplies?
Water Use Patterns: How can major improvements in water use data collection,
access, and utilization be accelerated? How do changing lifestyles, standards of
living, and demographic trends affect water supply, demand, and management?
Water Management: What dams are planned in the region, and how will they
affect water management and hydrology? How can the results of internationaland national-level climate assessments be incorporated into water management
and policy at the sub-national level?

Environmental Risk and Security: Hazards datasets remain inconsistent and not
coded in ways that enable causal analysis of large-N samples of floods, droughts, heat
waves, and secondary impacts associated with climate variability. While deaths and
numbers of persons affected are regularly reported, and to a lesser extent physical
damages (e.g., houses and infrastructure destroyed), rigorous economic damage and need
estimation are a priority for policy research. Disaster resilience, recovery, and
reconstruction processes are less well documented than initial impacts, in part because
they occur when post-disaster attention wanes. The human dimensions of loss and
reconstruction require intensive field research, and strong relationships between research
and practice. New methods of post-disaster mobile phone survey data transfer and
mapping have considerable promise for advancing socio-economic lines of research on a
regional scale. Improved economic, social, and political datasets would help answer the
following questions:


Natural Hazards and Vulnerability: Which populations in the region will be most
vulnerable to a changing climate? What are the proximate and root causes of
vulnerability in the HKH region? How do alternatives for secure and sustainable
livelihoods differ for populations in the mountains more dependent on glaciers
and larger downstream populations on the plains? How can the results of
collaborative research on exemplars of disaster-resilient settlement, infrastructure,
and housing in mountain environments of the HKH region complement initiatives
to increase collaboration on climate change, glaciology, glacial lake outburst
flood monitoring, and flood warning – and help increase the prospects for

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

132

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security



successful adaptation to changes in climate and hydrology in the region? How can
early-warning systems be used to minimize deaths from hazards such as GLOFs?
Security Dynamics and Water Conflict: What is the current and future
institutional capacity to absorb change at the local, national, and international
levels? How can the research community design appropriate metrics to monitor
the capacity of governmental institutions to address water stress? Does water
stress, among other stressors, affect state stability? Through what mechanisms?
What are the possibilities for better incorporation of scientific information about
glaciers, hydrology, and climate change into international water-sharing treaties?
Will climate change impacts on glacial melt and hydrology be severe enough to
constitute a threat to water and food security and/or political stability?
OPTIONS FOR ADAPTING TO CHANGES IN
CLIMATE, HYDROLOGY, AND WATER AVAILABILITY

There are some potential adaptations that governments, communities, or
individuals may consider in response to climate change’s effects on the hydrologic
system. Even with significant international progress toward mitigating greenhouse gas
emissions, with current levels of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere, there will be significant climate change over the next few decades, and thus
some adaptation, particularly to strengthen water management systems, will be necessary.
It can be difficult to make decisions about which adaptation strategies to pursue in
the face of uncertainty about the magnitude of climate change’s hydrologic impacts.
Also, there are significant uncertainties about the effectiveness of various adaptation
options. Some adaptation options have been shown to be effective in adapting to
variability under current climatic conditions, but it is not known whether they will hold
up under a changing climate (NRC, 2010a). Additionally, implementation of adaptation
strategies can be challenging in developed countries:
Numerous attempts have been made to develop and implement adaptive
management strategies in environmental management, but many of them
have not been successful, for a variety of reasons, including lack of
resources, unwillingness of decision makers to admit to and embrace
uncertainty; institutional, legal, and political preferences for known and
predictable outcomes; the inherent uncertainty and variability of natural
systems; the high cost of implementation; and the lack of clear
mechanisms for incorporating scientific findings into decision making.
Despite all of the above challenges, often there is no better option for
implementing management regimes… (NRC, 2011b)
And developing countries are likely to face as many challenges.
Good first adaptation strategies to pursue are generally flexible (i.e., they do not
lock a country or other entity into a long-term commitment to the strategy), are relatively
low-cost and are “no regret” strategies (i.e., they would be good strategies to take
regardless of how severe climate change’s impacts become). In general, many strategies

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Conclusion

133

that encourage good management of water resources under current climate could serve as
useful adaptation strategies in a world with altered climate. Similarly, because people
with fewer resources are often more vulnerable to climate change disruptions, many
strategies that promote sustainable economic development could also be useful adaptation
strategies in the face of climate change.
There is a large literature on the topic of adaptation, and the Committee can only
briefly describe a few potential adaptation options in this section. Adaptation was
discussed previously in the context of water management institutions and disaster
agencies in Chapters 3 and 4, respectively. Here, the Committee describes options that
affect the supply or timing of water available to users, followed by options that affect the
demand of water by users. Then the Committee discusses integrated watershed
management and river basin management, which often consider both supply and demand.
Finally, the Committee discusses adaptation options to decrease the risk of negative
impacts from flooding.
Adapting Under Uncertainty: the Need to Monitor
As discussed above, and throughout this report, lack of understanding and a
paucity of data about current and emerging conditions of glacier melt and the hydrologic
system more generally is a major source of uncertainty in the region. Adaptive
management1 of water resources depends critically on observations of changes that are
occurring. Therefore, adaptation options will rely on expanding the monitoring programs
in the region, including increased hydrometeorological data; measurements of glacier
mass balances, seasonal snow cover, black carbon on snow and ice; assessment of GLOF
risks; streamflow data (i.e., discharge); water quality; and demographic patterns of water
use. Both remotely sensed and in situ data are valuable for such monitoring programs
(USAID, 2010).
In addition to uncertainties in the physical systems of the region, there are also
uncertainties in the social systems. Adaptive management of the region’s water resources
will require a greater understanding of how each option will affect downstream users, the
potential negative consequences of each option, and whether an option may prove to be
maladaptive. In addition, it will be necessary to monitor the impacts of adaptation
policies, and make adjustments to the policy as required. Interventions that can be
repurposed and customized are especially desirable when operating under conditions of
uncertainty and change. The capability to support and integrate interventions into local
innovations that are effective is also of great value. Effective program evaluation,
something that is often overlooked, is especially important when designing and
implementing interventions under conditions of uncertainty. A central concern with
adaptation strategies is their potential for changing power relationships and introducing
conflict, and for creating unrealistic expectations that can become difficult to manage and
a source of significant social tension. Some management and adaption options in the face
of hydrological change may themselves detrimentally affect water availability for
downstream riparians, possibly sparking or exacerbating water conflicts or political
1

Adaptive management is a flexible approach designed to meet management goals under a variety of future
climate conditions and requires a non-stationary view (e.g., Milly et al., 2008; NRC, 2010a, 2012b).

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

134

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

tensions. In other words, the rational pursuit of otherwise reasonable adaptation options
(e.g., the construction of more water storage, or the expansion of irrigation) as insurance
against prospective climate-induced shortfalls or volatility in future supply could have
negative consequences.
Supply-side Strategies
One potential impact of climate change on the region’s hydrology is to both
increase the frequency of high flow events and the frequency of low flow events. One
adaptation option is to try to increase storage, so water can be stored during wet periods
for use during dry periods. Three approaches to this effort are improved water supply
forecasting, dams, and catchment systems. In each approach, the need for flexible
systems that can adapt in a range of uncertain futures suggests that small-scale and lowcost systems may be the best options for at least the planning horizon of most countries
and donors.
New dams, either at a large or a small scale, are one way to increase hydropower
and/or storage in both the Indus and the Ganges/Brahmaputra, although any new dam
construction would likely be a politically controversial decision, both within a country
and between countries. Because climate will be changing over the long term, dam
planning needs to include multiple scenarios over the projected life of the dam to ensure
its usefulness under climate change. As well as the potential for being maladaptive over
time, dam construction could also have unintended and cumulative negative
consequences on the regional ecology, settlements, and downstream sediment supply
(e.g., NRC, 2011a). Additionally, geological instability limits the stability of major dams
and reservoir development in the region and adds risk from dam failure. In any event,
dam management regimes at existing dams will need to be altered, so that, rather than
being operated based upon the historical distribution of streamflow events, dam operation
is based on the current (altered) climate. Because changes in dam management will affect
the availability of water to downstream users, either in the same country as the dam or a
different one, such changes may have the potential for conflict if decisions are not made
cooperatively with all affected parties.
More local-scale catchment systems can store water in wet seasons for use in dry
seasons. Catchments are often constructed and managed at the local level. They are
relatively less expensive, lower impact, and easier to change than large dams.
Another adaptation option sometimes used in the face of water shortages is to
construct a system for interbasin water transfers, moving water from a relatively wet
place to a relatively dry place. Such systems are often extremely expensive to construct,
such as the Chinese plan to divert water from south China to the north, the South-North
Water Diversion Project, which is estimated to cost around $62 billion dollars (Wong,
2001). Moreover, any plan by upstream countries for an interbasin transfer in the
Ganges/Brahmaputra basins would likely have international political repercussions and
could be the basis for a conflict. Interbasin water transfer is further complicated by the
lack of understanding of the impact of climate changes on the hydrology of the region.
Changes in the flow of rivers in the relatively wet areas could impair their ability to
adequately provide water for the dry areas, decreasing the effectiveness of a very

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Conclusion

135

expensive project. For these reasons, proposals for interbasin water transfers are
generally controversial among hydrologists, policy analysts, NGOs, and the courts.
Usually, climate change adaptation is considered a separate topic from climate
change mitigation (i.e., the reduction in emissions of pollutants that cause climate
change). Greenhouse gas emission mitigation is by necessity a global challenge, because
most greenhouse gases are well mixed in the atmosphere. However, for South Asian
countries the control on the emission of aerosols and particulate matter could help
mitigate the regional pattern of climate change, because these pollutants play an
important regional role in, respectively, the monsoon cycle and the rate of snow and ice
melt. While the exact scientific relationship between these pollutants and regional climate
is still an area of active scientific exploration, there is potential that countries could
cooperate to maintain traditional climate patterns to some extent by limiting emissions of
aerosol and particular matter. Because actions by a small set of countries could
significantly change the regional concentration of these pollutants, such an agreement
could avoid the problem facing many global agreements about greenhouse gas pollutants,
where there are many actors who have to approve an agreement. Reducing aerosol
emissions is also a resilience-building strategy, in that it has the co-benefit of reducing
respiratory diseases and premature deaths, especially among women and children (NRC,
2010b).
One common adaptation strategy used to address short-term water shortages is to
withdraw groundwater. Groundwater is a form of water storage, and can be sustainably
used as long as withdrawal rates do not exceed recharge rates of the aquifer. However,
changes in the regional hydrology could affect the recharge rate, leading to uncertainties
in the amount of water that can be sustainably withdrawn. Increased use of groundwater
may be one adaptation to climate change, but some major aquifers are already being
depleted by excess withdrawals, so there are (often uncertain) limits to how extensively
increasing withdrawal from groundwater can be a long-term adaptation to climate
change. In addition, groundwater withdrawal in delta regions could lead to increased
subsidence, which in turn leads to increased sea level rise. Increased use of the traditional
karez or qanat system of channeling groundwater (Box 3.1) may serve as a climate
change adaptation, but success depends on the level of community cohesion and will be
limited unless enough groundwater is available for the system. Because available data
indicate the groundwater is currently being used unsustainably in the region, this
adaptation option, by itself, is likely not realistic; however major advances in conjunctive
management of surface and groundwater will be a high priority.
There are also options for local water storage. For instance, some high altitude
communities in the HKH region have experimented with building small ponds that freeze
in the winter into mini-glaciers (ICIMOD, 2000b). These mini-glaciers then melt slowly
over the growing season, providing farmers and towns with water. Larger reservoirs
could potentially become a hazard due to earthquake-induced failure, or change the
energy balance of snow-covered basins. Additionally, there are emerging technologies
that harvest water from humid air (ICIMOD, 2000a). An increasing number of cities in
South Asia are adopting harvesting requirements in building and development codes
(Agarwal et al., 2001). Another way to increase water supply at the local level is to re-use
treated wastewater (e.g., Kumar, R. et al., 2005), particularly for irrigation.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

136

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Given the uncertainty in the future magnitude of climate change impacts, one
general adaptation option is to expand the diversity of techniques that are used to obtain
water. The idea is that instead of just one source, which could be critically affected by
climate change, multiple sources would be relatively less sensitive to disruption by
climate change, unless climate change were to impact all the sources simultaneously and
synchronously.

Demand-side Strategies
Any strategy that increases water-use efficiency can serve as a potential climate
change adaptation, but can also increase a population’s vulnerability if users do not see
the value in using less water. Because users sometimes expand their use to take
advantage of increased water availability, efficiency gains do not always translate into
reductions in total water use. These gains may still increase the productivity of a given
water use per unit of water withdrawn and hence a sector’s resiliency to climate change.
The agricultural sector is the biggest user of water, and the one with the greatest potential
for increases in water-use efficiency to serve as an adaptation. For instance, cotton, rice,
and sugarcane irrigation in the Indus basin use a large volume of water, and small
reductions in the amount of water used per hectare could significantly reduce water use
by these crops. Another sector where gains in water-use efficiency may be helpful in
adapting to climate change would be the energy sector. Thermoelectric power plants that
use once-through cooling systems withdraw significantly more water than recirculating
cooling systems. While most of this water is discharged to the stream after use, there can
be local thermal impacts. A switch from once-through cooling to recirculating cooling
can significantly reduce water withdrawals by the sector. However, recirculating systems
have higher consumptive use than once-through systems, so tradeoffs are necessary
(NREL, 2003). Municipal water systems also could improve technological efficiency,
perhaps as part of extending their coverage to growing populations. Such adaptation
strategies require large infrastructure investments, which affects their feasibility.
There are a number of tools available to affect demand management. Some of
these are technology based and include flow restrictors, low flush toilets, closed conduit
irrigation systems – sprinkler and drip systems – and water metering, either by itself or in
connection with rational regimes of water pricing. In general, the relatively high capital
costs of these technologies make their adoption prohibitively expensive for much of the
water-using population in the region. More decentralized demand management
techniques include water pricing and water rationing. Shah (2009) describes how the
availability of complementary inputs like energy for pumping groundwater has been used
successfully to manage demand for irrigation water in some areas. This is accomplished
by making energy available only during certain periods of the day. These decentralized
demand management techniques have the advantage of allowing each user to adjust
consumption according to their circumstances.
More significant climate change impacts on hydrology might necessitate changes
in land use over time. For instance, farmers might adapt to climate change by shifting
from a water intensive crop that requires significant irrigation to a less intensive, perhaps
rainfed, crop. Such a strategy would require periodic adjustments to account for further

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Conclusion

137

changes in precipitation patterns. The focus of adaptation strategies might also be how to
reduce irrigation demands during extreme low flow periods of the year. While forgoing
irrigation during low flow events imposes an economic cost on farmers, it may leave
enough water in surface and groundwater for downstream users. However, this may have
a negative impact on regional food security, again demonstrating the complexities of
adaptation options.
River Basin Management
The ideal model for river basin management and the processes for developing,
managing, and maintaining this management has been given considerable thought and
evolved through time (Molle et al., 2010; NRC, 2010c). Embedded within this discussion
is the concept of environmental flow(s) (EF) that describe the water regime (quantity,
timing, and quality) within a system that is required to maintain the surrounding
ecosystem and human livelihood. Most environmental flow assessments have been
developed and performed in developed countries. Yet assessment of environmental flows
in developing countries, such as those in the HKH region, is a necessary step towards
successful river basin management and some progress has been made (Smakhtin et al.,
2006).
Oftentimes water managers implement minimum environmental flow
requirements based on system objectives such as maintaining populations of fish at a
given level or supplying local communities and/or agriculture with a given volume of
water (NRC, 2010d). When a river basin is at the point where there is no more utilizable
flow in a given year, the basin is said to be “closed” (Falkenmark and Molden, 2008). If a
basin is closed and utilization continues, an unsustainable situation ensues. The waters of
the Indus and the Ganges are already said to be overallocated or nearing overallocation,
thus, “closed” basins (Falkenmark and Molden, 2008; Smakhtin, 2008).
Efforts to effectively manage river basins attempt to avoid this type of situation
and the associated impacts such as a decrease in water quality or inequitable sharing of
the resource. It is becoming increasingly realized that the biological and social systems
supported by water are not adequately described by a single minimum flow requirement
or a set of flow requirements but a more comprehensive assessment of water management
is needed that accounts for hydrologic change (NRC, 2012b). This would include, for
example, basic strategies such as demand management, increased storage, establishment
of environmental flows, and operational flexibility (NRC, 2012b).
One option, Integrated Watershed Management (IWM), attempts to consider both
demand and supply-side strategies for managing water in a basin to find a solution to any
water problems in the basin. While definitions of IWM vary, the general focus of
management is on looking at all uses of water simultaneously when making policy
decisions. For the Ganges/Brahmaputra and the Indus, there is a clear need, for example,
to link management of surface water resources more closely with management of
groundwater resources. There is also a need for management decisions to be made
considering the needs of water users in different countries. This is often a difficult task
politically, but the existing international agreements (e.g., Indus Water Treaty) illustrate
that agreements about water allocations can be achieved.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

138

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Many of the international agreements in the region are not yet fully integrating
climate change considerations into their decision-making, and any progress on this front
could serve as a climate change adaptation, by ensuring the basin water resources are
managed efficiently and equitably in a changing climate. Climate change planning at the
national level is important. Even if many national hydrologic agencies are considering the
potential impacts of climate change, many other national government agencies are not. If,
for instance, agencies deciding on the construction of new irrigation systems are not
adequately considering the effect of climate change in their decisions, then countries may
commit significant resources to irrigation that will not be useful in a future climate.
At national and subnational levels, opportunities exist to provide knowledge and
assistance to farmers in efficient water use, especially as regards irrigation systems. Local
or subnational organizations, networked for greater impact, can develop farm-level and
cooperative strategies for both groundwater and surface water use. Another adaptation
option includes establishing or strengthening community-based water user associations
(WUAs) and forest user groups (FUGs), with better coordination links to national policy
frameworks for water management and health (clean water and sanitation) (USAID,
2010).

Managing Flood Risks
The first step in reducing potential flooding impacts from climate change is to
map which communities are at risk (NRC, 2009). The primary risk of flooding from
glacier melt per se is GLOFs, which are mostly a risk to high elevation communities
along rivers and streams, but similar phenomena can pose risks at lower elevations when
debris or ice jams dam water that then bursts out. In contrast, the risk of downstream
flooding may be increased by climate change, depending on a number of factors
including the rate and timing of snowmelt and the magnitude of monsoonal rains.
Because there are many large settlements near rivers in the lower floodplains of the
Ganges/Brahmaputra and Indus Basins, if climate change increases the risk of
downstream flooding events it could significantly affect hundreds of millions of people.
Once communities at risk from flooding are identified, there are various options
that can be used to minimize risk, although many are very difficult to implement. New
development can be limited in floodplains or other sensitive areas, or existing homes and
infrastructure in floodplains at risk of flooding can be decommissioned. Vegetation,
including forests, can be restored where needed to retain water and thus mitigate
flooding. Governments can offer flood insurance programs, as the Federal Emergency
Management Agency’s National Flood Insurance Program does in the United States, both
mandatory in high risk areas and non-mandatory in low risk areas. Alternatively, new
infrastructure can be built to protect areas at risk of floods (for example, dams, pumping
stations, or storage basins). Sometimes this infrastructure is traditional “grey”
infrastructure, such as levees. However, levees are often considered to be maladaptive, as
they can encourage settlement in vulnerable low elevation areas (NRC, 2012b). In other
cases, so called “green” infrastructure solutions are used, where floodplains are
reconnected hydrologically with rivers to allow flood waters to spread out over the entire

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Conclusion

139

floodplain. This reduces the flooding risk to downstream communities by reducing the
height of peak flows in a river.
Flood management also includes early warning systems, which can reduce deaths
and injuries, and disaster response capacity, which is highly variable in the region.
Improvements in each of these areas would be adaptive to both glacier melt and
hydrologic change.
There is a growing sentiment within parts of the climate science community that
the social effects of climate change are already more extensive than previously thought or
recognized, and are mounting more quickly and more extensively than predicted. This
suggests that in discussions of climate change impacts over 50 year plus time horizons
may have to be replaced with ten year plus time horizons, and more comprehensive
approaches to hydroclimatic forecasting, natural hazards mitigation, and water
management.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

140

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

References
Adger, W. N. 2006. Vulnerability. Global Environmental Change 16(3):268-281.
Aftab, N. 2011. Climate Change Policy “sidelined” in Pakistan. The International News
December 20, 2011.
Agarwal, A., S. Narain, and I. Khurana. 2001. Making Water Everybody’s Business:
Policy and Practice of Water Harvesting. New Dehli: Centre for Science and
Environment.
Ahmad, S. and S. I. Hasnain.2004. Analysis of Satellite Imageries for Characterization of
Glacio-Morphological Features of the Gangotri Glacier, Ganga Headwater,
Garhwal Himalayas. Geological Survey of India, Special Publication 80:61-67.
Ahmed, M. 1989. Tree-ring Chronologies of Abies pindrow (Royle) Spach., from
Himalayan Region of Pakistan. Pakistan Journal of Botany 21:118-127.
Ahmed, M. and E. Cook. 2011. Upper Indus River-flow reconstruction using tree-rings:
implications for agriculture and hydroelectricity. Pakistan-US Science and
Technology Cooperation Program Final Report. National Academy of Sciences,
Development Security and Cooperation, Policy and Global Affairs 14.
AKU (Aga Khan University ) and UNICEF (United Nations Children's Fund). 2012.
Pakistan National Nutrition Survey. Karachi, Pakistan: Pakistan Medical Research
Council.
Alford, D., R. Armstrong and A. Racoviteanu. 2010. Glacier Retreat in the Nepal
Himalaya: An Assessment of the Role of Glaciers in the Hydrologic Regime of
the Nepal Himalaya. A Report to South Asia Sustainable Development Office.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
Ali, G., S. Hasson and A. M. Khan. 2009. Climate Change: Implications and Adaptation
of Water Resources in Pakistan, GCISC-RR-13. Islamabad, Pakistan: Global
Change Impact Studies Centre.
ALNAP (Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance in Humanitarian
Action). 2012. Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance in
Humanitarian Action. Available at http://www.alnap.org/about.aspx, accessed
June 21, 2012.
AMS (American Meteorological Society). 2000. Glossary of Meteorology, Second
Edition. Boston, MA: Allen Press.
Andermann, C., L. Longuevergne, S. Bonnet, A. Crave, P. Davy and R. Gloaguen. 2012.
Impact of transient groundwater storage on the discharge of Himalayan rivers.
Nature Geosciences 5(2):127-132.
APN (Asia-Pacific Network for Global Change Research). 2004. Water Resources in
South Asia: An Assessment of Climate Change-associated Vulnerabilities and
Coping Mechanisms. Final report for APN project 2004-02-CMY-Muhammed.
Kobe, Japan: Asia-Pacific Network for Global Change Research.

141
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

142

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Archer, D. R., N. Forsythe, H. J. Fowler and S. M. Shah. 2010. Sustainability of Water
Resources Management in the Indus Basin Under Changing Climatic and Socio
Economic Conditions. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences 7:1883-1912.
Armstrong, R. L. 2010. The Glaciers of the Hindu-Kush-Himalayan Region: A Summary
of the Science Regarding Glacier Melt/Retreat in the Himalayan, Hindu Kush,
Karakoram, Pamir, and Tien Shan Mountain Ranges. Technical Paper.
Kathmandu, Nepal: International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development.
Asha, A. K. 2012. Water is Life. India-Pakistan Meeting of Water Experts. Available at
http://www.amankiasha.com/articles_cat.asp?catid=1.
Asian Development Bank and World Bank. 2010. Pakistan Floods 2010: Preliminary
Damage and Needs Assessment. Islamabad, Pakistan.
Bajracharya, S., S. B. Maharjan and F. Shrestha. 2011. Glaciers Shrinking in Nepal
Himalaya. In Climate Change: Geophysical Foundations and Ecological Effects,
J. Blanco and H. Kheradmand, eds. Rijeka, Croatia: InTech.
Bajracharya, S., P. K. Mool and B. Shrestha. 2007. Impact of Climate Change on
Himalayan Glaciers and Glacial Lakes: Case Studies on GLOF and Associated
Hazards in Nepal and Bhutan. Kathmandu, Nepal: International Centre for
Integrated Mountain Development.
Balk, D. 2009. More Than a Name: Why is Global Urban Population Mapping a
GRUMPy Proposition? In Global Mapping of Human Settlemenet: Experiences,
Data Sets, and Prospects, P. Gamba and M. Herold, eds. New York: Taylor and
Francis.
Bandyopadhyay, J. and N. Ghosh. 2009. Holistic Engineering and Hydro-Diplomacy in
the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna Basin. EPW Economics & Political Weekly
xliv(45):50-61.
Barnett, T. P., J. C. Adam and D. P. Lettenmaier. 2005. Potential Impacts of a Warming
Climate on Water Availability in Snow-Dominated Regions. Nature
438(7066):303-309.
Barry, R. G. 2006. The status of research on glaciers and global glacier recession: A
review. Progress in Physical Geography 30(3):285-306.
BBC News. 1998. Bangladesh Floods Rise Again. Available at
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/south_asia/157254.stm, accessed March, 29, 2012.
Beck, M. W., A. H. Claassen and P. J. Hundt. 2012. Environmental and Livelihood
Impacts of Dams: Common Lessons Across Development Gradients that
Challenge Sustainability. International Journal of River Basin Management
10(1):73-92.
Beck, U. 1992. Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity. London, United Kingdom: Sage
Publications Ltd.
Beck, U. 2009. World at Risk. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Beckman, L. 2009. An Annotated Bibliography of Natural Hazard Loss DataSets.
Derived from the Hazards Loss Dataset Catalog. Boulder, CO: Natural Hazards
Center, Center for Science and Technology Policy Research, University of
Colorado.
Below, R., F. Vos and D. Guha-Sapir. 2010. Moving Towards Harmonization of Disaster
Data: A Study of Six Asian Databases, CRED Working Paper No. 272. Brussels,

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

References

143

Belgium: Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters, and Washington,
DC: United States Agency for International Development.
Benn, D. I. and L. A. Owen. 1998. The role of the Indian summer monsoon and the midlatitude westerlies in Himalayan glaciation: review and speculative discussion.
Journal of the Geological Society 155(2):353-363.
Benson, R. D. 2008. Dams, Duties and Discretion: Bureau of Reclamation Water Project
Operations and the Endangered Species Act. Journal of Environmental Law
33(1):2-56.
Bernbaum, E. 1998. Sacred Mountains of the World. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Bernbaum, E. 2006. Sacred Mountains: Themes and Teachings. Mountain Research and
Development 26(4):304-309.
Bhambri, R., T. Bolch, R. K. Chaujar and S. C. Kulshreshtha. 2011. Glacier Changes in
the Garhwal Himalaya, India from 1968 to 2006 Based on Remote Sensing.
Journal of Glaciology 57(203):543-556.
Bhattacharyya, A., V. C. LaMarche Jr. and M. K. Hughes. 1992. Tree-Ring Chronologies
from Nepal. Tree-Ring Bulletin 52(59-66).
Bhattacharyya, A., V. C. LaMarche Jr. and F. W. Telewski. 1988. Dendrochronological
Reconnaissance of the Conifers of Northwest India. Tree-Ring Bulletin 48:21-30.
Bhattacharyya, A., S. K. Shah and V. Chaudhary. 2006. Would tree ring data of Betula
utilis be potential for the analysis of Himalayan glacial fluctuations? Current
Science 91(6):754-761.
Bhutiyani, M. R. 1999. Mass-balance Studies on Siachen Glacier in the Nubra Valley,
Karakoram Himalaya, India. Journal of Glaciology 45(149):112-118.
Bhutiyani, M. R., V. S. Kale and N. J. Pawar. 2007. Long-term Trends in Maximum,
Minimum, and Mean Annual Air Temperatures Across the Northwestern
Himalaya During the Twentieth Century. Climatic Change 85(1-2):159-177.
Bhutiyani, M. R., V. S. Kale and N. J. Pawar. 2010. Climate Change and the Precipitation
Variations in the Northwestern Himalaya: 1866-2006. International Journal of
Climatology 30:535-548.
Bhutta, M. N. and L. K. Smedema. 2005. Drainage and Salinity Management.
Background Paper No. 15. In Country Water Resources Assistance Strategy.
Water Economy: Running Dry. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Bhutta, Z. 2011. Pakistan-India Water Disputes: No Headway in Wullar Barrage
Negotiations. The Express Tribune with the International Herald Tribune, May
13, 2011.
Bolch, T., A. Kulkarni, A. Kääb, C. Huggel, F. Paul, J. G. Cogley, H. Frey, J. S. Kargel,
K. Fujita, M. Scheel, S. Bajracharya and M. Stoffel. 2012. The State and Fate of
Himalayan Glaciers. Science 336(6079):310-314.
Bolch, T., T. Pieczonka and D. I. Benn. 2011. Multi-Decadal Mass Loss of Glaciers in
the Everest Area (Nepal Himalaya) Derived from Stereo Imagery. The
Cryosphere 5(2):349-358.
Bollasina, M., Y. Ming and V. Ramaswamy. 2011. Anthropogenic aerosols and the
weakening of the south asian summer monsoon. Science 334(6055):502-505.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

144

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Bollasina, M., S. Nigam and K.-M. Lau. 2008. Absorbing Aerosols and Summer
Monsoon Evolution Over South Asia: An Observational Protrayal. Journal of
Climate 21(13):3221-3239.
Bookhagen, B. 2012. Hydrology: Himalayan groundwater. Nature Geoscience advance
online publication. Available at
http://www.nature.com/ngeo/journal/v5/n2/full/ngeo1366.html, accessed August
13, 2012
Bookhagen, B. and D. W. Burbank. 2010. Toward a complete Himalayan hydrological
budget: Spatiotemporal distribution of snowmelt and rainfall and their impact on
river discharge. Journal of Geophysical Research 115(F3):F03019.
Boos, W. R. and Z. Kuang. 2010. Dominant control of the South Asian monsoon by
orographic insulation versus plateau heating. Nature 463(7278):218-222.
Borgaonkar, H. P., G. B. Pant and K. Rupa Kumar. 1994. Dendroclimatic reconstruction
of summer precipitation at Srinagar, Kashmir, India, since the late-eighteenth
century. The Holocene 4(3):299-306.
Borgaonkar, H. P., S. Ram and A. B. Sikder. 2009. Assessment of Tree-ring Analysis of
High-elevation Cedrus deodara D. Don from Western Himalaya (India) in
Relation to Climate and Glacier Fluctuations. Dendrochronologia 27(1):59-69.
Borgaonkar, H. P., A. B. Sikder and S. Ram. 2011. High Altitude Forest Sensitivity to the
Recent Warming: A Tree-ring Analysis of Conifers from Western Himalaya,
India. Quaternary International 236(1-2):158-166.
Braithwaite, R. J. 2002. Glacier mass balance: the first 50 years of international
monitoring. Progress in Physical Geography 26(1):76-95.
Bräuning, A. 1994. Dendrochronology for the Last 1400 years in Eastern Tibet.
GeoJournal 34(1):75-95.
Bräuning, A. and B. Mantwill. 2004. Summer Temperature and Summer Monsoon
History on the Tibetan Plateau During the Last 400 Years Recorded by Tree
Rings. Geophysical Research Letters 31:L24205.
Briscoe, J. and R. P. S. Malik. 2006. India’s Water Economy: Bracing for a Turbulent
Future. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Briscoe, J. and U. Qamar. 2006. Pakistan’s Water Economy Running Dry. Washington,
DC: World Bank and Oxford University Press.
Brown, C. 2012. Decision-scaling for Robust Planning and Policy under Climate
Uncertainty. World Resources Report Uncertainty Series. Washington, DC:
World Resources Institute.
Burton, I. 2010. Forensic Disaster Investigations in Depth: A New Case Study Model.
Environment September/October 2010:36-41.
Butzer, K. W. 1982. Archaeology as Human Ecology: Theory and Method for a
Contextual Approach. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
Cai, X., B. R. Sharma, M. A. Matin, D. Sharma and S. Gunasinghe. 2010. An Assessment
of Crop Water Productivity in the Indus and Ganges River Basins: Current Status
and Scope for Improvement (IWMI Research Report 140). Colombo, Sri Lanka:
International Water Management Institute.
CAST (Council on Agricultural Science and Technology). 1988. Effective Use of Water
in Irrigated Agriculture. Report # 113. Ames, IA: Council on Agricultural Science
and Technology.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

References

145

Chellaney, B. 2011. Water: Asia’s New Battleground. Washington, DC: Georgetown
University Press.
Christensen, J. H., B. Hewitson, A. Busuioc, A. Chen, X. Gao, I. Held, R. Jones, R. K.
Kolli, W.-T. Kwon, R. Laprise, V. M. Rueda, L. Mearns, C. G. Menéndez, J.
Räisänen, A. Rinke, A. Sarr and P. Whetton. 2007. Regional Climate Projections.
In Climate Change 2007:The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working
Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, S. Solomon, D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K. B.
Averyt, M. Tignor and H. L. Miller, eds. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
CIESIN (Center for Earth Science Information Network). 2004. Global Rural-Urban
Mapping Project (GRUMP): Urban Extents. Palisades, NY: Center for Earth
Science Information Network.
Climate and Development Knowledge Network. 2012. Managing Climate Extremes and
Disasters in Asia: Lessons from the SREX Report. London: CDKN. Available at
www.cdkn.org/srex, accessed August 13, 2012.
Cogley, J. G. 2011. Present and Future States of Himalaya and Karakoram Glaciers.
Annals of Glaciology 52(59):69-73.
Collier, P. 2007. The Bottom Billion: Why the Poorest Countries are Failing and What
Can be Done About it. Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.
Collier, P., V. L. Elliott, H. Hegre, A. Hoeffler, M. Reynal-Querol and N. Sambanis.
2003. Breaking the Conflict Trap: Civil War and Development Policy. Oxford,
United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.
Comeau, L. E. L., A. Pietroniro and M. N. Demuth. 2009. Glacier contribution to the
North and South Saskatchewan Rivers. Hydrological Processes 23(18):26402653.
Cook, E. R. and L. A. Kairiukstis. 1990. Methods of Dendrochronology: Applications in
the Environmental Sciences. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Cook, E. R. and P. J. Krusic 2011. Unpublished Data.
Cook, E. R., P. J. Krusic and P. D. Jones 2003. Dendroclimatic Signals in Long Tree-ring
Chronologies from the Himalayas of Nepal. International Journal of Climatology
23:707-732.
Cook, E. R. and N. Pederson 2010. Uncertainty, emergence, and statistics in
dendrochronology. In Developments in Paleoecological Research. Hughes, M.
K.et al: Springer.
Cooley, H., J. Christian-Smith, Gleick,, Peter H., L. Allen and M. J. Cohen 2012. Climate
Change and transboundary waters. In The World’s Water, Volume 7. Gleick, P.
H., eds. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Coyle, D. 2005. The Role of Mobiles in Disasters and Emergencies. Version I.
CRED. 2011. EM-DAT: The International Disaster Database. Retrieved August 30, 2011,
from http://www.emdat.be/.
Crow, B. and N. Singh 2008. The Management of Inter-State Rivers as Demands Grow
and Supplies Tighten: India, China, Nepal, Pakistan, Bangladeah. MPRA Paper
No. 12433.
Cuffey, K. M. and W. S. B. Paterson 2010. The Physics of Glaciers, Fourth Edition.
Burlington, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann, Elsevier.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

146

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Cutter, S. L. 2006. Hazards, Vulnerability and Environmental Justice. London, United
Kingdom: Earthscan.
Cutter, S. L., C. G. Burton and C. T. Emrich 2010. Disaster Resilience Indicators for
Benchmarking Baseline Conditions. Journal of Homeland Security and
Emergency Management 7(1):Article 51.
Darnault, C. J. G. 2008. Overexploitation and Contamination of Shared Groundwater
Resources. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
Dartmouth Flood Observatory. 2011. Space-based Measurement and Modeling of
Surface Water for Research, Humanitarian, and Water Management Applications.
Retrieved August 30, 2011, from http://floodobservatory.colorado.edu/.
Dash, S. K., M. A. Kulkarni, U. C. Mohanty and K. Prasad 2009. Changes in the
characteristics of rain events in India. Journal of Geophysical Research
114(D10):D10109.
del Ninno, C., P. A. Dorosh, L. C. Smith and D. K. Roy 2001. The 1998 Floods in
Bangladesh: Disaster Impacts, Household Coping Strategies, and Response.
Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.
Derbyshire, E. and M. Fort 2006. Geomorphology and mountain hazards in the Hunza
Valley. In Karakoram in transition: culture. development and ecology in the
Hunza Valley. Kreutzmann, H.: Oxford University Press.
Deudney, D. and R. Matthew 1999. Contested Grounds: Security and Conflict in the New
Environmental Politics. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Diamond, J. 2004. Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed. New York:
Viking Adult.
Diaz, H. F. and R. S. Bradley 1997. Temperature Variations During the Last Century at
High Elevation Sites. Climatic Change 36:253-279.
DNI 2012. Global Water Security. Report No. ICA 2012-08. Washington, DC: The
Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) was the principal drafter with contributions
from NGA, CIA, State/INR, and DOE.
Dobhal, D. P., J. T. Gergan and R. J. Thayyen 2004. Recession and Morphogeometrical
Changes of Dokriani Glacier (1962-1995) Garhwal Himalaya, India. Current
Science, Journal of the Indian National Science Academy 86(5):692-696.
DRC 2007. Global Migrant Origin Database. Available at:
http://www.migrationdrc.org/research/typesofmigration/global_migrant_origin_da
tabase.html. Development Research Centre on Migration, Globalisation, and
Poverty.
Duan, K., L. G. Thompson, T. Yao, M. E. Davis and E. Mosley-Thompson 2007. A 1000
Year History of Atmospheric Sulfate Concentrations in Southern Asia as
Recorded by a Himalayan Ice Core. Geophysical Research Letters 34:L01810.
Duan, K., T. Yao and L. G. Thompson 2006. Response of Monsoon Precipitation in the
Himalayas to Global Warming. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres
111:D19110.
Duflo, E. and R. Pande 2007. Dams. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(2):601646.
Dunning, S. A., N. J. Rosser, D. N. Petley and C. R. Massey 2006. Formation and failure
of the Tsatichhu landslide dam, Bhutan. Landslides 3(2):107-113.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

References

147

Dyurgerov, M. B. 2010. Reanalysis of Glacier Changes: from the IGY to the IPY 19602008. Data Glaciol. Stud. 108:1-116.
Dyurgerov, M. B. and M. F. Meier 1997. Mass Balance of Mountain and Subpolar
Glaciers: A New Global Assessment for 1961-1990. Arctic and Alpine Research
29(4):379-391.
Dyurgerov, M. B. and M. F. Meier 2005. Glaciers and the Changing Earth System: A
2004 Snapshot. Occasional Paper No. 58. Boulder, CO.
Eck, D. L. 1998. Ganga: The Goddess Ganges in Hindu Sacred Geography. In Devi:
Goddess of India. Hawley, J. S. and D. M. Wulff, eds. New Delhi, India: Shri
Jainendra Press.
Eck, D.L. 2012 India, A Sacred Geography. New York: Harmony Books, Random House
(Chapter 4: The Ganga and the rivers of India, pp. 131-188).
Eck, T. F., B. N. Holben, O. Dubovik, A. Smirnov, P. Goloub, H. B. Chen, B. Chatenet,
L. Gomes, X.-Y. Zhang, S.-C. Tsay, Q. Ji, D. Giles and I. Slutsker 2005.
Columnar Aerosol Optical Properties at AERONET Sites in Central Eastern Asia
and Aerosol Transport to the Tropical mid-Pacific. Journal of Geophysical
Research: Atmospheres 110:D06202.
ECLAC 2003. Handbook for Estimating the Socio-economic and Environmental Effects
of Disasters.
Eriksson, M., X. Jianchu, A. B. Shrestha, R. Vaidya, S. Nepal and K. Sandstrom 2009.
The Changing Himalayas: Impact of Climate Change on Water Resources and
Livelihoods in the Greater Himalayas. Kathmandu, Nepal.
Esper, J., A. Bosshard, F. H. Schweingruber and M. Winiger 1995. Tree-rings from the
Upper Timberline in the Karakorum as Climatic Indicators for the Last 1000
years. Dendrochronologia 13:79-88.
Esper, J., F. H. Schweingruber and M. Winiger 2002. 1300 Years of Climate History for
Western Central Asia Inferred from Tree-rings. The Holocene 12(3):267-277.
Esper, J., S. G. Shiyatov, V. S. Mazepa, R. J. S. Wilson, D. A. Graybill and G.
Funkhouser 2003. Temperature-senstive Tien Shan Tree Ring Chronologies Show
Multi-Centential Growth Trends. Climate Dynamics 21(7-8):699-706.
Falkenmark, M. 1989. The Massive Water Scarcity Now Threatening Africa: Why Isn’t it
Being Addressed? Ambio 18(2):112-118.
Falkenmark, M. 1990. Global Water Issues: Confroting Humanity. Journal of Peace
Research 27(2):177-190.
Falkenmark, M. and G. Lindh 1974. How Can We Cope With the Water Resources
Situation by the Year 2015? Ambio 3(3/4):114-122.
Falkenmark, M., J. Lundqvist and C. Widstrand 1989. Macro-Scale Water Scarcity
Requires Micro-Scale Approaches. Natural Resources Forum 13(4):258-267.
Falkenmark, M. and D. Molden 2008. Wake Up to the Realities of River Basin Closure.
Water Resources Development 24(2):201-215.
Falkenmark, M. and J. Rockstrom 2006. The New Blue and Green Water Paradigm:
Breaking New Ground for Water Resources Planning and Management. Journal
of Water Resources Planning and Management, American Society of Civil
Engineers May/June 2006.
Falkenmark, M. and C. Widstrand 1992. Population and Water Resources: A Delicate
Balance. Population Bulletin 47(3):1-36.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

148

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Fan, Z. X., A. Bräuning and K. F. Cao 2008a. Annual Temperature Reconstruction in the
Central Hengduan Mountains, China as Deduced from Tree Rings.
Dendrochronologia 26(2):97-107.
Fan, Z. X., A. Bräuning and K. F. Cao 2008b. Tree-ring Based Drought Reconstruction in
the Central Hengduan Mountains Region (China) since A.D. 1655. International
Journal of Climatology 28:1879-1887.
FAO 2011. AQUASTAT Database. Food and Agriculture Organization. Water Resources
Development and Management Service. Rome, Italy.
Fischhendler, I. 2004. Legal and institutional adaptation to climate uncertainty: A study
of international rivers. Water Policy 6(4):281-302.
Flanner, M. G., C. S. Zender, P. G. Hess, N. M. Mahowald, T. H. Painter, V. Ramanathan
and P. J. Rasch 2009. Springtime Warming and Reduced Snow Cover from
Carbonaceous Particles. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 9(7):2481-2497.
Flanner, M. G., C. S. Zender, J. T. Randerson and P. J. Rasch 2007. Present-Day Climate
Forcing and Response From Black Carbon in Snow. Journal of Geophysical
Research: Atmospheres 112:D11202.
Fowler, H. J. and D. R. Archer 2006. Conflicting Signals of Climatic Change in the
Upper Indus Basin. Journal of Climate 19(17):4276-4293.
Fritts, H. C. 1976. Tree Rings and Climate. New York: Academic Press.
Fujita, K. and T. Nuimura 2011. Spatially Heterogeneous Wastage of Himalayan
Glaciers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 108(34):14011-14014.
Gall, M., K. A. Borden and S. L. Cutter 2009. When do Losses Count? Six Fallacies of
Natural Hazards Loss Data. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society
90(6):799-809.
Gao, X., Z. Zhao and F. Giorgi 2002. Changes of extreme events in regional climate
simulations over East Asia. Advances in Atmospheric Sciences 19(5):927-942.
GAR. 2011. DesInventar Disaster Information System. Retrieved August 30, 2011, from
http://www.desinventar.net/DesInventar/profiletab.jsp?countrycode=np.
Gardelle, J., E. Berthier and Y. Arnaud 2012. Slight mass gain of Karakoram glaciers in
the early twenty-first century. Nature Geosci advance online publication.
Gartzke, E. 2007. The Capitalist Peace. American Journal of Political Science 51(1):166191.
Gautam, R. 2011. Private Communication to Member of the Committee on Himalayan
Glaciers, Hydrology, Climate Change, and Implications for Water Security.
Gautam, R., C. Hsu, K.-M. Lau and M. Kafatos 2009a. Aerosol and Rainfall Variability
over the Indian Monsoon Region: Distributions, Trends and Coupling. Annales
Geophysicae 27:3691-3703.
Gautam, R., N. C. Hsu and K.-M. Lau 2010. Premonsoon Aerosol Characterization and
Radiative Effects Over the Indo-Gangetic Plains: Implications for Regional
Climate Warming. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 115:D17208.
Gautam, R., N. C. Hsu, K.-M. Lau, S.-C. Tsay and M. Kafatos 2009b. Enhanced PreMonsoon Warming Over the Himalayan-Gangetic Region from 1979 to 2007.
Geophysical Research Letters 36:L07704.
GCISC 2007. Enhancement of National Capacities in the Application of Simulation
Models for the Assessment of Climate Change and its Impacts on Water

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

References

149

Resources and Food and Agricultural Production. Final Report for APNCAPABLE Project (Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Pakistan). Islamabad, Pakistan.
Gearheard, S., C. Aporta, G. Aipellee and K. O’Keefe 2011. The Igliniit project: Inuit
hunters document life on the trail to map and monitor arctic change. Canadian
Geographer / Le Géographe canadien 55(1):42-55.
Ghumman, M. 2012. Climate Change Policy Approved by Cabinet: Issue of Capacity
Payment to IPPs Referred to ECC. Karachi, Pakistan.
Glantz, M. 1998. Societal Responses to Regional Climatic Change: Forecasting by
Analogy. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Gleick, P. H. 1993. WATER AND CONFLICT - FRESH-WATER RESOURCES AND
INTERNATIONAL SECURITY. International Security 18(1):79-112.
Gleick, P. H. 1998. Water and Conflict. In The world’s water, 1998-1999 : the biennial
report on freshwater resources. Gleick, P. H., eds. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Gleick, P. H. 2000. How much water is there and whose is it? In The world’s water 20002001 : the biennial report on freshwater resources. Gleick, P. H., eds. Washington,
D.C.: Island Press.
Gleick, P. H. 2006. Water and terrorism. Water Policy 8(6):481-503.
Gleick, P. H., Ed. 2011. The World’s Water, Volume 7. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Glennon, R. 2002. Water Follies: Groundwater Pumping and the fate of America’s Fresh
Waters Washington, DC: Island Press.
GO-Science 2011. Foresight: Migration and Global Environmental Change - Future
Challenges and Opportunities. Final Project Report. London, United Kingdom.
Goswami, B. N., V. Venugopal, D. Sengupta, M. S. Madhusoodanan and P. K. Xavier
2006. Increasing Trend of Extreme Rain Events Over India in a Warming
Environment. Science 314(5804):1442-1445.
Government of India 2006a. Report of the Working Group on Disaster Management for
the Eleventh Five Year Plan, 2007-2012. New Dehli, India.
Government of India 2006b. Vulnerability Atlas of India. First Revision. New Delhi,
India.
Government of India 2008. Eleventh Five Year Plan, 2007-2012. Volume I, Inclusive
Growth. New Dehli, India.
Government of India 2009. National Water Mission under National Action Plan on
Climate Change. Comprehensive Mission Document. Volume I. New Dehli,
Resources, M. o. W.
Government of India 2012. Draft National Water Policy (2012) As Recommended by
National Water Board in its 14th Meeting Held on 7th June, 2012. Resources, M.
o. W. Third Revised Draft July 2012.
Government of Pakistan 2012. Economic Survey 2011-2012. Islamabad, Pakistan,
Ministry of Finance.
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh 2010a. National Plan for Disaster
Management 2010-2015. Dhaka, Bangladesh.
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh 2010b. Standing Orders on Disaster.
Dhaka, Bangladesh.
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh 2011. National Progress Report on
the Implementation of the Hyogo Framework for Action. Dhaka, Bangladesh.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

150

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Guha-Sapir, D., J. M. Rodriguez-Llanes and T. Jakubicka 2011. Using Disaster
Footprints, Population Databases and GIS to Overcome Persistent Problems for
Human Impact Assessment in Flood Events. Natural Hazards 58(3):845-852.
Gupta, A. K., S. S. Nair, S. Chopde and P. Singh 2010. Risk to Resilience: Strategic
Tools for Disaster Risk Management. Proceedings of the International Workshop.
New Dehli, India. February 3-4, 2009.
Gupta, S. and M. Muralikrishna 2010. South Asia Disaster Risk Management
Programme: Synthesis Report on SAR Countries Disaster Risks. Prepared by
RMSI.
Gupta, V. and M. P. Sah 2008. Impact of the Trans-Himalayan Landslide Lake Outburst
Flood (LLOF) in the Satluj catchment, Himachal Pradesh, India. Natural Hazards
45(3):379-390.
Gyawali, D. 2011. Toad’s Eye Perspective: The Missing Element in Climate Change
Debates. Presented at the Workshop on Himalayan Glaciers, H., Climate Change,
and Implications for Water Security. Washington, DC, October 19-20, 2011.
Hallegate, S. 2012. A cost effective solution to reduce disaster losses in developing
countries: hydro-meteorological services, early warning, and evacuation. Policy
Research Working Paper 6058. Washington DC: The World Bank.
Halvorson, S. J. 2003. A Geography of Children’s Vulnerability: Gender, Household
Resources, and Water-Related Disease Hazard in Northern Pakistan. The
Professional Geographyer 55(2):120-133.
Halvorson, S. J. and J. P. Hamilton 2010. In the Aftermath of the 2005 Qa’yamat: The
Kashmir Earthquake Disaster in Northern Pakistan. Disasters: The Journal of
Disaster Studies, Policy, and Management 34(1):184-204.
Hamner, J. H. and A. T. Wolf 1998. Patterns in International Water Resource Treaties :
the transboundary freshwater dispute database. Colorado Journal of International
Environmental Law and Policy. 1997 Yearbook, 1998.
Hardoy, J. E., D. Mitlin and D. Satterthwaite 2001. Environmental Problems in an
Urbanizing World: Finding Solutions in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. London,
UK: Earthscan Publications, Ltd.
Hewitt, K. 1982. NATURAL DAMS AND OUTBURST FLOODS OF THE
KARAKORAM HIMALAYA. Hydrological Sciences Journal-Journal Des
Sciences Hydrologiques 27(2):266-267.
Hewitt, K. 1983. Interpretations of Calamity: From the Viewpoint of Human Ecology.
Winchester, MA: Allen & Unwin.
Hewitt, K. 2005. The Karakoram Anomaly? Glacier Expansion and the ‘Elevation
Effect,’ Karakoram Himalaya. Mountain Research and Development 25(4):332340.
Hodges, K. 2006. Climate and the Evolution of Mountains. Scientific American 295:7279.
Hoekstra, A. Y., A. K. Chapagain, M. M. Aldaya and M. M. Mekonnen 2011. The Water
Footprint Assessment Manual: Setting the Global Standard. London, United
Kingdom; Washington, D.C.: Earthscan.
Hoekstra, A. Y. and M. M. Mekonnen 2011. Global Water Scarcity: The Monthly Blue
Water Footprint Compared to Blue Water Availability for the World’s Major

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

References

151

River Basins. Value of Water Research Report Series No. 53. Delft, The
Netherlands.
Holzhauser, H., M. Magny and H. J. Zumbuühl 2005. Glacier and lake-level variations in
west-central Europe over the last 3500 years. The Holocene 15(6):789-801.
Homer-Dixon, T. 1999. Environment, Scarcity and Violence. Princeton, NJ: Princetone
University Press.
Homer-Dixon, T. 2006. The Upside of Down: Catastrophe, Creativity, and the Renewal
of Civilization. New York: Island Press.
Hughes, M. K. and A. C. Davies 1987. Dendroclimatology in Kashmir Using Tree Ring
Widths and Densities in Subalpine Conifers. In Methods of Dendrochonology:
East-West Approaches. Kairiukstis, L.et al, eds. Vienna: IIASA/PAN.
Humphrey, N. F. and C. F. Raymond 1994. Hydrology, erosion and sediment production
in a surging glacier: Variegated Glacier, Alaska, 1982-83. Journal of Glaciology
40(136):539-552.
Huss, M. 2011. Present and future contribution of glacier storage change to runoff from
macroscale drainage basins in Europe. Water Resour. Res. 47(7):W07511.
Huss, M., D. Farinotti, A. Bauder and M. Funk 2008. Modelling runoff from highly
glacierized alpine drainage basins in a changing climate. Hydrological Processes
22(19):3888-3902.
ICIMOD 2000a. Local Water Harvesting in Mountain Areas. Kathmandu, Nepal:
International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development.
ICIMOD 2000b. Waters of Life: Perspectives of Water Harvesting in the Hindu KushHimalayas. Kathmandu, Nepal: International Centre for Integrated Mountain
Development.
ICIMOD 2011a. Glacial Lakes and Glacial Lake Outburst Floods in Nepal. Kathmandu,
Nepal.
ICIMOD 2011b. The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region.
Kathmandu, Nepal: International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development.
ICIMOD. 2012a. HKH-HYCOS. Retrieved June 20, 2012, from
http://www.icimod.org/?q=264.
ICIMOD 2012b. Integrated Water and Hazard Management. Kathmandu, Nepal.
IDSA 2010. Water Security for India: The External Dynamics. IDSA Task Force Report.
New Dehli: Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses.
Immerzeel, W. W., L. P. H. van Beek and M. F. P. Bierkens 2010. Climate Change Will
Affect the Asian Water Towers. Science 328(5984):1382-1385.
Immerzeel, W. W., L. P. H. van Beek, M. Konz, A. B. Shrestha and M. F. P. Bierkens
2012. Hydrological response to climate change in a glacierized catchment in the
Himalayas. Climatic Change 110(3):721-736.
India Water Review. 2011. Teesta Water Treaty Between India, Bangladesh Scrapped.
from http://www.indiawaterreview.in/Story/News/teesta-water-treaty-betweenindia-bangladesh-scrapped/373/1.
Interworks LLC 2010. A Guide to Improving Disaster Resilience of Mountain
Communities. Don Mills, Ontario.
IPCC 2012. Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate
Change Adaptation. A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. Stocker,

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

152

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner,
S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge, UK and New York,
NY, USA: Cambridge University Press.
IRDR 2011. Forensic Disaster Investigations: The FORIN Project. Forin #1. (version 3).
Beijing, China.
ISET 2008. Climate Adaptation in Asia: Knowledge Gaps and Research Issues in South
Asia. Boulder, CO and Kathmandu, Nepal: Institute for Social and Environmental
Transition.
ISRO 2011. Snow and glaciers of the Himalayas – A study by Indian Space Research
Organisation. Space Applications Centre. Manali, HP, India.
IUCN 2008. Community Perceptions on Climate Change in Shigar Valley, Pakistan. .
Karachi, Pakistan.
IUCN n.d. Community Perceptions on Climate Change in Shigar Valley, Pakistan. A
Case Study.: International Union for Conservation of Nature.
Ives, J. D. and B. Messerli 1989. The Himalayan Dilemma: Reconciling Conservation
and Development. London, UK: Routledge Press.
Iyer, R. R. 2003. Water: Perspectives, Issues, Concerns. New Delhi: Sage.
Iyer, R. R. 2007. Towards Water Wisdom: Limits, Justice, Harmony. New Dehli: Sage.
Iyer, R. R. 2012. River Linking Project: A Disquieting Judgment. Economic and Political
Weekly. April 4, 2012, pp. 33-40.
Jacob, T., J. Wahr, W. T. Pfeffer and S. Swenson 2012. Recent contributions of glaciers
and ice caps to sea level rise. Nature 482(7386):514-518.
Jinnah Institute. 2012. Trade Biggest Achievement, Water the Biggest Challenge in IndoPak Relations. Retrieved July 16, 2012, from http://jinnahinstitute.org/programs/strategic-security-program/462-trade-biggest-achievementwater-the-biggest-challenge-in-indo-pak-relations.
Johannesson, T., C. Raymond and E. W. Waddington 1989. Time-Scale for Adjustment
of Glaciers to Changes in Mass Balance. Journal of Glaciology 35(121):355-369.
Johnstone, N. 1997. Economic Inequality and the Urban Environment: The Case of
Water and Sanitation: International Institute for Environment and Development,
Environmental Economics Program, Dicussion Paper DP 97-03.
Joy, K. J. e. a., Ed. 2008. Water Conflicts in India: A Million Revolts in the Making. New
Delhi: Routledge.
Kadota, T. 1997. Study on the Relation Between Climate and Recent Shrinkage of Small
Glaciers in the Nepal Himalaya. Ph.D. Thesis. Nagoya University, Japan.
Kaltenborn, B. P. N. C. and V. I. Ims 2010. High mountain glaciers and climate change :
challenges to human livelihoods and adaptation. Arendal, Norway: GRID-Arendal
: UNEP.
Kapur, A. 2009. On Disasters in India. New Dehli, India: Foundation Books Pvt. Ltd.
Kapur, A. 2010. Vulnerable India: A Geographical Study of Disasters. New Delhi, India:
SAGE Publications Pvt. Ltd.
Kargel, J. S., J. G. Cogley, G. J. Leonard, U. Haritashya and A. Byers 2011. Himalayan
Glaciers: The Big Pictures is a Montage. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 108(36):14709-14710.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

References

153

Kaser, G., J. G. Cogley, M. B. Dyurgerov, M. F. Meier and A. Ohmura 2006. Mass
Balance of Glaciers and Ice Caps: Consensus Estimates for 1961-2004.
Geophysical Research Letters 33:L19501.
Kaser, G., A. G. Fountain and P. Jansson 2003. A manual for monitoring the mass
balance of mountain glaciers. Paris, France: UNESCO.
Kaser, G., M. Großhauser and B. Marzeion 2010. Contribution potential of glaciers to
water availability in different climate regimes. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences.
Kaspari, S. D., M. Schwikowski, M. Gysel, M. G. Flanner, S. Kang, S. Hou and P. A.
Mayewski 2011. Recent Increase in Black Carbon Concentrations from a Mt.
Everest Ice Core Spanning 1860-2000 AD. Geophysical Research Letters
38:L04703.
Kehrwald, N. M., L. G. Thompson, T. Yao, E. Mosley-Thompson, U. Schotterer, V.
Alfimov, J. Beer, J. Eikenberg and M. E. Davis 2008. Mass Loss on Himalayan
Glacier Endangers Water Resources. Geophysical Research Letters 35:L22503.
Krain, M. and M. E. Myers 1997. Democracy and Civil War: A Note on the Democratic
Peace Proposition. International Interactions 23(1):109-118.
Kreutzmann, H., Ed. 2000. Sharing Water: Irrigation and Water Management in the
Hindukush, Karakorum, Himalaya. Karachi: Oxford University Press.
Kulkarni, A., B. P. Rathore, S. K. Singh and I. M. Bahuguna 2011. Understanding
Changes in the Himalayan Cryoshpere using Remote Sensing Techniques.
International Journal of Remote Sensing 32(3):601-615.
Kulkarni, A. V., I. M. Bahuguna, B. P. Rathore, S. K. Singh, S. S. Randhawa, R. K. Sood
and S. Dhar 2007. Glacial Retreat in Himalaya Using Indian Remote Sensing
Satellite Data. Current Science 92(1):69-74.
Kulkarni, A. V., B. P. Rathore, S. Mahajan and P. Mathur 2005. Alarming Retreat of
Parbati Glacier, Beas Basin, Himachal Pradesh. Current Science 88(11):18441850.
Kumar, K., R. K. Dumka, M. S. Miral, G. S. Satyal and M. Pant 2008. Estimation of
Retreat Rate of Gangotri Glacier Using Rapid Static and Kinematic GPS Survey.
Current Science, Journal of the Indian National Science Academy 94(2):258-262.
Kumar, R., G. Areendran and P. Rao 2009. Witnessing Change: Glaciers in the Indian
Himalayas.
Kumar, R., R. D. Singh and K. D. Sharma 2005. Water Resources of India. Current
Science, Journal of the Indian National Science Academy 89(5):794-812.
Lal, R. e. a., Ed. 2011. Climate Change and Food Security in South Asia. Dordrecht:
Springer.
Landscan 2010. High Resolution global Population Data Set copyrighted by UT-Battelle,
LLC, operator of Oak Ridge National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-AC0500OR22725 with the United States Department of Energy. The United States
Government has certain rights in this Data Set. Neither UT-Batelle, LLC nor the
United States Department of Energy, nor any of their employees, makes an
warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for
the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of the data set.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

154

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Lau, K. M. and K. M. Kim 2006. Observational Relationships Between Aerosol and
Asian Monsoon Rainfall and Circulation. Geophysical Research Letters
33:L21810.
Lau, K. M. and K. M. Kim 2010. Fingerprinting the Impacts of Aerosols on Long-term
Trends of the Indian Summer Monsoon Regional Rainfall. Geophysical Research
Letters 37:L16705.
Lau, K. M. and K. M. Kim 2011a. The 2010 Pakistan Flood and Russian Heat Wave:
Teleconnection of Hydrometeorological Extremes. Journal of Hydrometeorology
13(1):392-403.
Lau, K. M. and K. M. Kim 2011b. Comment on “elevated heat pump hypothesis for the
aerosol-monsoon hydroclimate link: Grounded in observations?” by S. Nigam and
M. Bollasina. Journal of Geophysical Research D: Atmospheres 116(7).
Lau, K. M., K. M. Kim, C. Hsu and B. Holben 2009. Possible Influences of Air Pollution,
Dust, and Sandstorms on the Indian Monsoon. World Meteorological
Organization Bulletin 58(1):22-30.
Lau, K. M., M. K. Kim and K. M. Kim 2006. Asian Summer Monsoon Anomalies
Induced by Aerosol Direct Forcing: The Role of the Tibetan Plateau. Climate
Dynamics 26(7-8):855-864.
Lau, K. M., M. K. Kim, K. M. Kim and W.-S. Lee 2010. Enhanced Surface Warming and
Accelerated Snow Melt in the Himalayas and Tibetan Plateau Induced by
Absorbing Aerosols. Environmental Research Letters 5(2).
Lau, K. M., V. Ramanathan, G.-X. Wu, Z. Li, S.-C. Tsay, C. Hsu, R. Sikka, B. Holben,
D. Lu, G. Tartari, M. Chin, R. Koudelova, H. Chen, Y. Ma, J. Huang, K.
Taniguchi and R. Zhang 2008. The Joint Aerosol-Monsoon Experiment: A New
Challenge for Monsoon Climate Research. Bulletin of the American
Meteorological Society 89(3):369-383.
Li, Z.-S., Q.-B. Zhang and K. Ma 2011. Tree-ring Reconstruction of Summer
Temperature for A.D. 1475-2003 in the Central Hengduan Mountains,
Northwestern Yunnan, China. Climatic Change in press.
Liang, E., X. Shao and N. Qin 2008. Tree-ring based summer temperature reconstruction
for the source region of the Yangtze River on the Tibetan Plateau. Global and
Planetary Change 61(3–4):313-320.
Liang, E., X. Shao and Y. Xu 2009. Tree-ring Evidence of Recent Abnormal Warming on
the Southeast Tibetan Plateau. Theoretical and Applied Climatoloty 98(1-2):9-18.
Liu, C.-H., Y.-F. Shi, Z.-T. Wang and Z.-C. Xie 2000. Glacier Resources and Their
Distributive Characteristics in China: A Review on Chinese Glacier Inventory.
Journal of Glaciology and Geocryology 22(2):106-112.
Liu, J., B. Yang and C. Qin 2011. Tree-ring Based Annual Precipitation Reconstruction
since AD 1480 in South Central Tibet. Quaternary International 236(1-2):75-81.
Liu, X. and B. Chen 2000. Climatic Warming in the Tibetan Plateau During Recent
Decades. International Journal of Climatology 20(14):1729-1742.
Logistics Cluster. 2012. Hosted by the World Food Programme (Rome). Retrieved June
21, 2012, from http://www.logcluster.org/.
Luckman, B. H. 1993. Glacier fluctuation and tree-ring records for the last millennium in
the Canadian Rockies. Quaternary Science Reviews 12(6):441-450.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

References

155

Macchi, M. 2011. Framework for Community-Based Climate Vulnerability and Capacity
Assessment in Mountain Areas. Special Publication. Kathmandu, Nepal.
Mack, T. J., M. A. Akbari, M. H. Ashoor, M. P. Chornack, T. B. Coplen, D. G. Emerson,
B. E. Hubbard, D. W. Litke, R. L. Michel, L. N. Plummer, M. T. Rezai, G. B.
Senay, J. P. Verdin and I. M. Verstraeten 2010. Conceptual Model of Water
Resources in the Kabul Basin, Afghanistan. Prepared in cooperation with the
Afghanistan Geological Survey under the auspices of the United States Agency
for International Development. Reston, VA.
Malhotra, P. 2010. Water Issues between Nepal, India, and Bangladesh. New Delhi,
India: Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies.
Mansfield, E. D. and J. Snyder 2005. Electing to Fight: Why Emerging Democracies Go
to War. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
McCaffrey, S. C. 2003. The need for flexibility in freshwater treaty regimes. Natural
Resources Forum 27(2):156-162.
McDonald, R. I., I. Douglas, C. Revenga, R. Hale, N. Grimm, J. Grönwall and B. Fekete
2011a. Global Urban Growth and the Geography of Water Availability, Quality,
and Delivery. Ambio 40(5):437-446.
McDonald, R. I., P. Green, D. Balk, B. M. Fekete, C. Revenga, M. Todd and M.
Montgomery 2011b. Urban Growth, Climate Change, and Freshwater
Availability. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 108(15):6312-6317.
McLeman, R. and B. Smit 2006. Migration as an Adaptation to Climate Change. Climatic
Change 76(1):31-53.
Meehl, G. A., J. M. Arblaster and W. D. Collins 2008. Effects of Black Carbon Aerosols
on the Indian Monsoon. Journal of Climate 21(12):2869-2882.
Meier, M. F. 1962. Proposed Definitions for Glacier Mass Budget Terms. Journal of
Glaciology 4(33):252-263.
Menon, S., J. Hansen, L. Nazarenko and Y. Luo 2002. Climate effects of black carbon
aerosols in China and India. Science 297(5590):2250-2253.
Menon, S., D. Koch, G. Beig, S. Sahu, J. Fasullo and D. Orlikowski 2010. Black Carbon
Aerosols and the Third Polar Ice Cap. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics
10:4559-4571.
Meyer, W. B., et. al 1998. Reasoning by Analogy. In Human choice and climate change.
Rayner, S. M., Elizabeth L., eds. Columbus, Ohio: Battelle Press.
Michel, A. A. 1967. The Indus Rivers: A Study of the Effects of Partition. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.
Michel, D. and A. Pandya 2009. Troubled Waters: Climate Change, Hydropolitics, and
Transboundary Resources. Washington, DC.
Milly, P. C. D., J. Bettancourt, M. Falkenmark, R. M. Hirsch, Z. W. Kundzewicz, D.
Lettenmaier and R. J. Stouffer 2008. Stationarity is Dead: Whither Water
Management? . Science 319(5863):pp. 573-574.
Moench, M. 2010. Responding to Climate and Other change Processes in Complex
Contexts: Challenges Facing Development of Adaptive Policy Frameworks in the
Ganga Basin. Technological Forecasting and Social Change 77(6):975-986.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

156

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Moench, M. and A. Dixit, Eds. 2004. Adaptive Capacity and Livelihood Resilience:
Adaptive Strategies for Responding to Floods and Droughts in South Asia:
Institute for Social and Environmental Transition.
Moench, M. and D. Gyawali 2008. Desakota: Reinterpreting the Urban-Rural
Continuum. London, United Kingdom.
Mohan, N. S., S. Routray and N. Sashikumar, Eds. 2010. River Water Sharing:
Transboundary Conflict and Cooperation in India. New Delhi: Routledge.
Moiwo, J. P., Y. Yang, F. Tao, W. Lu and S. Han 2011. Water storage change in the
Himalayas from the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE) and an
empirical climate model. Water Resources Research 47(7).
Molle, F., P. Wester and P. HIrsch 2010. River Basin Closure: Processes, Implications,
and Responses. Agricultural Water Management 97:569-577.
Molle, F., P. Wester, P. HIrsch, J. R. Jensen, H. Murray-Rust, V. Paranjpye, S. Pollard
and P. van der Zaag 2007. River Basin Development and Management. In Water
for Food, Water for Life: A Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in
Agriculture. Molden, D., eds. London, United Kingdom: Earthscan.
Monirul Qader Mirza, M. and Q. K. Ahmad, Eds. 2005. climate Change and Water
Resources in South Asia. Leiden: A.A. Balkema.
Moser, C. and D. Satterthwaite 2008. Towards Pro-Poor Adaptation to Climate Change in
the Urban Centres of Low- and Middle-Income Countries: International Institute
for Environment and Development.
Munich Re. 2012. NatCatSERVICE. Retrieved February 21, 2012, from
http://www.munichre.com/en/reinsurance/business/nonlife/georisks/natcatservice/default.aspx.
Mustafa, D. 2011. Hydro-Climatic Challenges for Pakistan: Ideational and Material
Drivers. Presented at the Workshop on Himalayan Glaciers, H., Climate Change,
and Implications for Water Security. Washington, DC, October 19-20, 2011.
Mustafa, D. and D. Wrathall 2011. Indus Basin Floods of 2010: Souring of a Faustian
Bargain? Water Alternatives 4(1):72-85.
Naidu, G. V. C. 2009. India and East Asian Multilateralisam. In India’s Foreign Policy.
Ghosh, A.et al, eds. Delhi: Pearson Education.
Nainwal, H. C., B. D. S. Negi, M. Chaudhary, K. S. Sajwan and A. Gaurav 2008.
Temporal Changes in Rate of Recession: Evidences from Sataopanth and
Bhagirath Kharak Glaciers, Uttarakhand, Using Total Station Survey. Current
Science, Journal of the Indian National Science Academy 94(5):653-660.
Naithani, A. K., H. C. Nainwal, K. K. Sati and C. Prasad 2001. Geomorphological
Evidences of Retreat of the Gangotri Glacier. Current Science, Journal of the
Indian National Science Academy 80(1):87-88.
Negi, H. S. and A. Kokhanovsky 2011a. Retrieval of snow albedo and grain size using
reflectance measurements in Himalayan basin. The Cryosphere 5(1):203-217.
Negi, H. S. and A. Kokhanovsky 2011b. Retrieval of Snow Grain Size and Albedo of
Western Himalayan Snow Cover Using Satellite Data. The Cryosphere 5(4):831847.
Negi, H. S., A. V. Kulkarni and B. S. Semwal 2009. Study of contaminated and mixed
objects snow reflectance in Indian Himalaya using spectroradiometer. Int. J.
Remote Sens. 30(2):315-325.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

References

157

Nigam, S. and M. Bollasina 2010. “Elevated heat pump” hypothesis for the aerosolmonsoon hydroclimate link: “Grounded” in observations? Journal of Geophysical
Research D: Atmospheres 115(16).
Noy, I. 2009. The macroeconomic consequences of disasters. Journal of Development
Economics 88(2):221-231.
NRC 1997. Valuing Ground Water: Economic Concepts and Approaches. Washington,
DC: National Academy Press.
NRC 2003a. Cities Transformed. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
NRC 2003b. Risk Analysis in Flood Damage Reduction Studies Washington, DC:
National Academies Press.
NRC 2009. Mapping the Zone. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
NRC 2010a. Adapting to the Impacts of Climate Change. Washington, DC: National
Academies Press.
NRC 2010b. Advancing the Science of Climate Change. Washington, DC: National
Academies Press.
NRC 2010c. Progress Towards Restoring the Everglades, The Third Biennial Review.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
NRC 2010d. A Scientific Assessment of Alternatives for Reducing Water Management
Effects on Threatened and Endangered Fishes in California’s Bay-Delta.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
NRC 2011a. Missouri River Planning: Recognizing and Incorporating Sediment
Management. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
NRC 2011b. A Review of the Use of Science and Adaptive Management in California’s
Draft Bay Delta Conservation Plan. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
NRC 2012a. Challenges and Opportunities in the Hydrologic Sciences. Washington,
D.C.: National Academies Press.
NRC 2012b. Sustainable Water and Environmental Management in the California BayDelta. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
NREL 2003. Consumptive Water Use for U.S. Power Production. NREL/TP-550-33905.
Golden, CO.
OCHA, U. 2010. Relief Web. Situation Reports. Indus Flooding.
Oregon State University. 2012a. Case Study of the Transboundary Dispute Resolution:
The Indus Water Treaty. Retrieved January 19, 2012, from
http://www.transboundarywaters.orst.edu/research/case_studies/Indus_New.htm.
Oregon State University. 2012b. International Freshwater Treaties Database. Retrieved
January 19, 2012, from
http://www.transboundarywaters.orst.edu/database/interfreshtreatdata.html.
Ostrom, E. 1990. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective
Action. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Owen, L. A., R. C. Finkel, P. L. Barnard, M. Haizhou, K. Asahi, M. W. Caffee and E.
Derbyshire 2005. Climatic and topographic controls on the style and timing of
Late Quaternary glaciation throughout Tibet and the Himalaya defined by 10Be
cosmogenic radionuclide surface exposure dating. Quaternary Science Reviews
24(12–13):1391-1411.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

158

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Owen, L. A., R. C. Finkel and M. W. Caffee 2002. A Note on the Extent of Glaciation
Throughout the Himalaya During the Global Last Glacial Maximum. Quaternary
Science Reviews 21(1):147-157.
Oye, K. 1986. Cooperation Under Anarchy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Pahuja, S., N. H. Rao and W. Garvey 2010. Scoping Strategic Options for Development
of the Kabul River Basin: A Multisectoral Decision Support System Approach.
Washington, DC.: Sustainable Development Department, South Asia Region. The
World Bank.
Pant, G. B. 1979. Role of Tree-ring Analysis and Related Studies in Palaeoclimatology:
Preliminary Survey and Scope for Indian Region. Mausam 30:439-448.
Peatty, D. 2011. Sacred Sites, Conservation, and Tourism. Kyoto, Japan.
Poff, N. L., B. D. Richter, A. H. Arthington, S. E. Bunn, R. J. Naiman, E. Kendy, M.
Acreman, C. Apse, B. P. Bledsoe, M. C. Freeman, J. Henriksen, R. B. Jacobson,
J. G. Kennen, D. M. Merritt, J. H. O’Keeffe, J. D. Olden, K. Rogers, R. E.
Tharme and A. Warner 2010. The Ecological Limits of Hydrologic Alternation
(ELOHA): A New Framework for Developing Regional Environmental Flow
Standards. Freshwater Biology 55:147-170.
Postel, S. L. 2000. Entering an Era of Water Scarcity: the Challenges Ahead. Ecological
Applications 10(4):941-948.
Postel, S. L. and A. T. Wolf 2001. Dehydrating Conflict. Foreign Policy.
Prasad, A. K., K.-H. S. Yang, H. M. El-Askary and M. Kafatos 2009. Melting of Major
Glaciers in the Western Himalayas: Evidence of Climatic Changes from Long
Term MSU Derived Tropospheric Temperature Trend (1979-2008). Annales
Geophysicae 27(12):4505-4519.
Preston, S. H. 1979. Urban Growth in Developing Countries: A Demographic
Reappraisal. Population and Development Review 5(2):195-215.
PSFG 1967. Fluctuations of Glaciers 1959-1965 (Vol. I). Zurich, Switzerland: IAHS
(ICSI)/UNESCO, Permanent Service on Fluctuations of Glaciers.
PSFG 1973. Fluctuations of Glaciers 1965-1970 (Vol. II). Zurich, Switzerland: IAHS
(ICSI)/UNESCO, Permanent Service on Fluctuations of Glaciers.
Qian, Y., M. G. Flanner, L. R. Leung and W. Wang 2011. Sensitivity Studies on the
Impacts of Tibetan Plateau Snowpack Pollution on the Asian Hydrological Cycle
and Monsoon Climate. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 11(5):1929-1948.
Qin, J., K. Yang, S. L. Liang and X. F. Guo 2009. The Altitudinal Dependence of Recent
Rapid Warming Over the Tibetan Plateau. Climatic Change 97(1-2):321-327.
Qureshi, A. S. S. T. A. M. 2003. The groundwater economy of Pakistan. Lahore:
International Water Management Institute.
Racoviteanu, A. 2011. Himalayan Glaciers: Combining remote sensing, field techniques
and indigenous knowledge to understand spatio-temporal patterns of glacier
changes and their impact on water resources. University of Colorado, Boulder,
CO. PhD.
Racoviteanu, A., M. W. Williams and R. G. Barry 2008. Optical remote sensing of
glacier characteristics: A review with focus on the Himalaya. Sensors 8(5):33553383.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

References

159

Raina, V. 2009. Himalayan Glaciers, a State-of-Art Review of Glacial Studies, Glacial
Retreat and Climate Change. Discussion Paper, Ministry of Environment and
Forests, New Delhi, India.
Rajeevan, M., J. Bhate and A. K. Jaswal 2008. Analysis of variability and trends of
extreme rainfall events over India using 104 years of gridded daily rainfall data.
Geophys. Res. Lett. 35(18):L18707.
Raleigh, C. 2011. The search for safety: The effects of conflict, poverty and ecological
influences on migration in the developing world. Global Environmental Change
21, Supplement 1(0):S82-S93.
Ramana, M. V., V. Ramanathan, I. A. Podgorny, B. B. Pradhan and B. Shrestha 2004.
The Direct Observations of Large Aerosol Radiative Forcing in the Himalayan
Region. Geophysical Research Letters 31:L05111.
Ramanathan, V. and G. Carmichael 2008. Global and Regional Climate Changes Due to
Black Carbon. Nature Geoscience 1(4):221-227.
Ramanathan, V., C. Chung, D. Kim, T. Bettge, L. Buja, J. T. Kiehl, W. M. Washington,
Q. Fu, D. R. Sikka and M. Wild 2005. Atmospheric Brown Clouds: Impacts on
South Asian Climate and Hydrological Cycle. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102(15):5326-5333.
Ramanathan, V., M. V. Ramana, G. Roberts, D. Kim, C. Corrigan, C. Chung and D.
Winker 2007. Warming Trends in Asia Amplified by Brown Cloud Solar
Absorption. Nature 448(7153):575-578.
Ramesh, K. V. and P. Goswami 2007. Reduction in temporal and spatial extent of the
Indian summer monsoon. Geophys. Res. Lett. 34(23):L23704.
Rees, H. G. and D. N. Collins 2006. Regional Differences in Response of Flow in
Glacier-fed Himalayan Rivers to Climatic Warming. Hydrological Processes
20(10):2157-2169.
ReliefWeb. 2011. Retrieved August 19, 2011, from http://reliefweb.int/.
ReliefWeb. 2012. Updates and Maps. Retrieved June 21, 2012, from
http://reliefweb.int/updates/thumb.
Ringler, C., A. K. Biswas and S. A. Cline, Eds. 2010. Global Change: Impacts on Water
and Food Security. Dordrecht: Springer.
Rodell, M., I. Velicogna and J. S. Famiglietti 2009. Satellite-Based Estimates of
Groundwater Depletion in India. Nature 460:pp. 999-1002.
Rosenfeld, D., U. Lohmann, G. B. Raga, C. D. O’Dowd, M. Kulmala, S. Fuzzi, A.
Reissell and M. O. Andreae 2008. Flood or Drought: How Do Aerosols Affect
Precipitation? Science 321(5894):1309-1313.
Sadoff, C. and H. Rao 2011. The Ganges Strategic Basin Assessment. Presented at World
Water Week, Stockholm, Sweden, August 21-27, 2011.
Sano, M., F. Furuta, O. Kobayashi and T. Sweda 2005. Temperature Variations Since the
mid-18th Century for Western Nepal, as Reconstructed from Tree-ring Width and
Density of Abies spectabilis. Dendrochronologia 23(2):83-92.
Satheesh, S. K. and V. Ramanathan 2000. Large differences in tropical aerosol forcing at
the top of the atmosphere and Earth’s surface. Nature 405(6782):60-63.
SAWI 2011. Annual Report 2011 (July 2010-June 2011). New Dehli, India: South Asian
Water Initiative.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

160

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Scherler, D., B. Bookhagen and M. R. Strecker 2011a. Hillslope-Glacier Coupling: The
Interplay of Topgraphy and Glacial Dynamics in High Asia. Journal of
Geophysical Research: Earth Surface 116:F02019.
Scherler, D., B. Bookhagen and M. R. Strecker 2011b. Spatially Variable Response of
Himalayan Glaciers to Climate Change Affected by Debris Cover. Nature
Geoscience 4:156-159.
Scherler, D., B. Bookhagen, M. R. Strecker, F. von Blanckenburg and D. Rood 2010.
Timing and extent of late Quaternary glaciation in the western Himalaya
constrained by 10Be moraine dating in Garhwal, India. Quaternary Science
Reviews 29(7–8):815-831.
Shah, T. 2009. Taming the Anarchy: Groundwater Governance in South Asia.
Washington, DC.
Shamsudduha, M., R. E. Chandler, R. G. Taylor and K. M. Ahmed 2009. Recent Trends
in Groundwater Levels in a Highly Seasonal Hydrological System: the GangesBrahmaputra-Meghna Delta. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences 13:23732385.
Shekhar, M. S., H. Chand, S. Kumar, K. Srinivasan and A. Ganju 2010. Climate-change
Studies in the Western Himalaya. Annals of Glaciology 51(54):105-112.
Shindell, D., J. C. I. Kuylenstierna, E. Vignati, R. van Dingenen, M. Amann, Z. Klimont,
S. C. Anenberg, N. Muller, G. Janssens-Maenhout, F. Raes, J. Schwartz, G.
Faluvegi, L. Pozzoli, K. Kupiainen, L. Höglund-Isaksson, L. Emberson, D.
Streets, V. Ramanathan, K. Hicks, N. T. K. Oanh, G. Milly, M. Williams, V.
Demkine and D. Fowler 2012. Simultaneously Mitigating Near-Term Climate
Change and Improving Human Health and Food Security. Science
335(6065):183-189.
Shrestha, A., C. P. Wake, P. A. Mayewski and J. E. Dibb 1999. Maximum Temperature
Trends in the Himalaya and its Vicinity: An Analysis Based on Temperature
Records from Nepal for the Period 1971-94. Journal of Climate 12(9):2775-2786.
Shrestha, P., A. P. Barros and A. Khlystov 2010. Chemical Composition and Aerosol
Size Distribution of the Middle Mountain Range in the Nepal Himalayas During
the 2009 Pre-Monsoon Season. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 10:1160511621.
Siebert, S., P. Doll, S. Feick, J. Hoogeveen and K. Frenken 2007. Aquastat Global Map
of Irrigation Areas version 4.01.
Sikka, A. and F. Gichuki 2006. Indo-Gangetic Basin : Enhancing Agricultural Water
Productivity through stategic research. Colombo, Sri Lanka.
Singh, J., W.-K. Park and R. R. Yadav 2006. Tree-ring Based Hydrological Records for
Western Himalaya, India, since A.D. 1560. Climate Dynamics 26(2-3):295-303.
Singh, J. and R. R. Yadav 2000. Tree-ring indications of recent glacier fluctuations in
Gangotri, western Himalaya, India. Current Science 79(11):1598-1601.
Singh, J. and R. R. Yadav 2005. Spring Precipitation Variations over the Western
Himalaya, India, since A.D. 1731 as Deduced from Tree Rings. Journal of
Geophysical Research-Atmospheres 110:D01110.
Singh, J., R. R. Yadav and M. Wilmking 2009. A 694-year Tree-ring Based Rainfall
Reconstruction from Himachal Pradesh, India. Climate Dynamics 33(7-8):11491158.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

References

161

Singh, P. and L. Bengtsson 2004. Hydrological Sensitivity of a Large Himalayan Basin to
Climate Change. Hydrological Processes 18(13):2363-2385.
Singh, P. and S. K. Jain 2002. Snow and Glacier Melt in the Satluj River at Bhakra Dam
in the Western Himalayan Region. Hydrological Sciences-Journal-des Sciences
Hydrologiques 47(1):93-106.
Singh, P., S. K. Jain and N. Kumar 1997. Estimation of Snow and Glacier-Melt
Contribution to the Chenab River, Western Himalaya. Mountain Research and
Development 17(1):49-56.
Singh, S. K. 2011. Sino-Indian Relations: Paradigm Shift in India-China Relations: From
Bilateralism to Multilateralism. Journal of International Affairs 64(2):155-168.
Smakhtin, V. 2008. Basin Closure and Environmental Flow Requirements. Water
Resources Development 24(2):227-233.
Smakhtin, V., R. L. Shilpakar and D. A. Hughes 2006. Hydrology-based Assessment of
Environmental Flows: An Example from Nepal. Hydrological Sciences Journal
51(2):207-222.
Supreme Court of India 2012. In Re: Networking of Rivers vs......”Civil Original
Jurisdictin writ Petition (Civil) No. 512 of 2002. Judgement. Accessed online at
http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41857247/ on 28 July 2012.
Swain, A. 2004. Managing Water Conflict: Asia, Africa, and the Middle East. New York,
NY: Routledge Press.
Tacoli, C. 2009. Crisis or adaptation? Migration and climate change in a context of high
mobility. Environment and Urbanization 21(2):513-525.
Tarlock, A. D. 2000. How Well can International Water Allocation Regimes Adapt to
Global Climate Change? Florida State University Journal of Land Use &
Environmental Law Summer:423 ff.
Thayyen, R. J. and J. T. Gergan 2010. Role of Glaciers in Watershed Hydrology: a
Preliminary Study of a “Himalayan Catchment”. The Cryosphere 4:115-128.
Thompson, L. G. 2010. Climate Change: The Evidence and Our Options. The Behavior
Analyst 33(2):153-170.
Thompson, L. G. and M. E. Davis 2005. Stable Isotopes Through the Holocene as
Recorded in Low-Latitude High-Altitude Ice Cores. In Isotopes in the Water
Cycle: Past, Present, and Future of a Developing Science. Aggarwal, P. K.et al,
eds. Dordrecht, The Netherlands Springer.
Thompson, L. G., E. Mosley-Thompson, H. Brecher, M. Davis, B. Leon, D. Les, P.-N.
Lin, T. Mashiotta and K. Mountain 2006. Abrupt Tropical Climate Change: Past
and Present. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 103(28):10536-10543.
Thompson, L. G., T. Yao, E. Mosley-Thompson, M. E. Davis, K. A. Henderson and P.N. Lin 2000. A High-Resolution Millennial Record of the South Asian Monsoon
from Himalayan Ice Cores. Science 289(5486):1916-1919.
Tiwari, V. M., J. Wahr and S. Swenson 2009. Dwindling groundwater resources in
northern India, from satellite gravity observations. Geophysical Research Letters
36(18).
Treydte, K. S., G. H. Schleser, G. Helle, D. C. Frank, M. Winiger, G. H. Hang and J.
Esper 2006. The Twentieth Century was the Wettest Period in Northern Pakistan
over the Past Millennium. Nature 440:1179-1182.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

162

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Turner, J. 2011. China and Water Security. Presented at the Workshop on Himalayan
Glaciers, H., Climate Change, and Implications for Water Security. Washington,
DC, October 19-20, 2011.
Ul Haq, E. 2007. Community Response to Climatic Hazards in Northern Pakistan.
Mountain Research and Development 27(4):308-312.
UN-HABITAT 2006. The State of the World’s Cities Report 2006-2007: The Millennium
Development Goals and Urban Sustainability - 30 Years of Shaping the Habitat
Agenda. Nairobi, Kenya.
UNEP 2007. Formation of lakes and glacier lake outburst floods (GLOFs) by Medvezhi
Glacier, Pamirs. United Nations Environment Program/GRID-Arendal Maps and
Graphics Library,.
UNEP 2008. Freshwater Under Threat: South Asia. Vulnerability Assessment of
Freshwater Resources to Environmental Change. Nairobi, Kenya: United Nations
Environment Programme.
United Nations 2011a. World Population Prospects, 2010 Revision. United Nations
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, New York.
United Nations 2011b. World Urbanization Prospects, 2009 Revision. New York: United
Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division.
Available: http://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/index.htm.
UNPD 2009. World Urbanization Prospects: The 2009 Revision. New York, NY.
Uprety, K. and S. Salman 2011. Legal Aspects of Sharing and Management of
Transboundary Waters in South Asia: Preventing Conflicts and Promoting
Cooperation. Hydrological Sciences Journal 56(4).
USAID 2010. Changing Glaciers and Hydrology in Asia: Addressing Vulnerabilities to
Glacier Melt Impacts. Prepared by E.L. Malone. Wasington DC.
USAID 2012. South Asia Regional Initiative for Energy (SARI). Washington, DC: U.S.
Agency for International Development.
Vale, L. J. and T. J. Campanella, Eds. 2005. The Resilient City: How Modern Cities
Recover from Disaster. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Van Steenbergen, F. and M. S. Gohar 2005. Groundwater Development and Management
in Pakistan. Background Paper No. 11. In Pakistan’s Water Economy Running
Dry, eds. Washington, DC: World Bank and Oxford University Press.
Verghese, B. G. 2007. Waters of Hope: From Vision to Reality in Himalaya-Ganga
Development Corporation. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Viviroli, D., H. H. Durr, B. Messerli, M. Meybeck and R. Weingartner 2007. Mountains
of the World, Water Towers for Humanity: Typology, Mapping, and Global
Significance. Water Resources Research 43:W07447.
Vuille, M., M. Werner, R. S. Bradley and F. Keimig 2005. Stable Isotopes in
Precipitation in the Asian Monsoon Region. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Atmospheres 110:D23108.
Wang, C., D. Kim, A. M. L. Ekman, M. C. Barth and P. J. Rasch 2009. Impact of
Anthropogenic Aerosols on Indian Summer Monsoon. Geophysical Research
Letters 36:L21704.
Warren, S. G. and W. J. Wiscombe 1980. A Model for the Spectral Albedo of Snow. II:
Snow Containing Atmospheric Aerosols. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
37(12):2734-2745.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

References

163

Water Resources Group 2009. Charting Our Water Future: Economic Frameworks to
Inform Decision-Making: 2030 Water Resources Group.
Watts, J. 2010. Chinese engineers propose the world’s biggest hydro-electric project in
Tibet: Mega-dam on Yarlung Tsangpo river would save 200m tonnes of CO2 but
could spark conflict over downstream water supply. Guardian Limited London: 1.
Wescoat, J. L. 1991. Managing the Indus River basin in light of climate change: Four
conceptual approaches. Global Environmental Change 1(5):381-395.
Wescoat, J. L. and R. M. Leichenko 1992. Complex river basin management in a
changing global climate : the Indus River basin in Pakistan : a national
assessment. Boulder, CO: University of Colorado.
WGMS 2008. Global Glacier Changes: Facts and Figures. World Glacier Monitoring
Service. Zurich, Switzerland.
WHO/UNICEF 2010. Joint Monitoring Programme (KMP) for Water supply and
Sanitation. World Health Organization and United Nations Children’s Fund,.
Wigley, T. M., K. R. Briffa and P. D. Jones 1984. On the Average Value of Correlated
Time Series, with Applications in Dendroclimatology and Hydrometeorology.
Journal of Climate and Applied Meteorology 23(2):201-213.
Wisner, B., P. Blaikie, T. Cannon, and I. Davis 2003. At Risk Natural Hazards, People’s
Vulnerability and Disasters. 2nd Edition. London : Routledge.
Wolf, A. T. 2007. Shared waters: Conflict and cooperation. In Annual Review of
Environment and Resources.
Wolf, A. T. and J. T. Newton 2008. Case Studies of Transboundary Dispute Resolution.
In Managing and Transforming Water Conflicts. Priscoli, J. D. and A. T. Wolf,
eds. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wong, E. 2001. Plan for China’s Water Crisis Spurs Concern.
World Bank 2006. Current and Looming Challenges. In India’s Water Economy: Bracing
for a Turbulent Future, eds. New Delhi, India: Oxford University Press.
World Bank 2008. Potential and Prospects for Regional Energy Trade in the South Asia
Region. Formal Report 334/08. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
World Bank 2010a. Afghanistan Scoping Strategic Options for Development of the
Kabul River Basin: A Multisectoral Decision Support System Approach.
Washington, D.C.
World Bank 2010b. Natural Hazards, UnNatural Disasters: The Economics of Effective
Prevention. Washington, D.C.
World Food Programme. 2011a. Country Pages. Retrieved August 19, 2011, from
http://www.wfp.org/countries.
World Food Programme. 2011b. Pakistan Overview. Retrieved August 19, 2011, from
http://www.wfp.org/countries/Pakistan/Overview.
Wulf, H., Bookhagen, Bodo., Scherler, Dirk 2011. Differentiating rainfall, snow and
glacial melt in the Sutlej Valley (western Himalaya) by distributed hydrological
modeling. Geophysical Research Abstracts 13(EGU2011-4494).
Xiang, H. 2010. Water Quality in the Tibetan Plateau. University of Eastern Finland,
Kuopio, Finland. Ph.D: 80.
Xin, W., L. Shiyin, G. Wanqin and X. Junli 2008. Assessment and Simulation of Glacier
Lake Outburst Floods for Longbasaba and Pida Lakes, China. Mountain Research
and Development 28(3/4):310-317.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

164

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Xinhua News 2010. China to Achieve Leapfrog Development, lasting stability in Tibet.
Xu, B., J. Cao, J. Hansen, T. Yao, D. R. Joswia, N. Wang, G. Wu, M. Wang, H. Zhao, W.
Yang, X. Liu and J. He 2009. Black Soot and the Survival of Tibetan Glaciers.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
106(52):22114-22118.
Xu, B., J. Cao, D. R. Joswiak, X. Liu, H. Zhao and J. He 2012. Post-Depositional
Enrichment of Black Soot in Snow Pack and Accelerated Melting of Tibetan
Glaciers. Environmental Research Letters 7(1):014022.
Xu, J., R. E. Grumbine, A. B. Shrestha, M. Eriksson, X. Yang, Y. Wang and A. Wilkes
2009. The Melting Himalayas: Cascading Effects of Climate Change on Water,
Biodiversity, and Livelihoods. Conservation Biology 23(3):520-530.
Yadav, R. R. 2011. Long-term Hydroclimate Variability in Monsoon Shadow Zone of
Western Himalaya, India. Climate Dynamics 36(78):1453-1462.
Yadav, R. R. and A. Bhattacharyya 1992. A 745-year Chronology of Cedrus deodara
from Western Himalaya, India, and its Dendroclimatic Potential.
Dendrochronologia 10:53-61.
Yadav, R. R., W.-K. Park and A. Bhattacharyya 1997. Dendroclimatic Reconstruction of
April-May Temperature Fluctuations in the Western Himalaya of India since A.D.
1698. Quaternary Research 48(2):187-191.
Yadav, R. R., W.-K. Park and A. Bhattacharyya 1999. Spring-temperature Variations in
Western Himalaya, India, as Reconstructed from Tree-ring. The Holocene
9(1):85-90.
Yadav, R. R., W.-K. Park, J. Singh and B. Dubey 2004. Do the Western Himalaya Defy
Global Warming? Geophysical Research Letters 31:L17201.
Yadav, R. R. and J. Singh 2002. Tree-ring-based Spring Temperature Patterns over the
Past Four Centuries in Western Himalaya. Quaternary Research 57(3):299-305.
Yang, B., X. Kang, A. Bräuning, J. Liu, C. Qin and J. Liu 2010. A 622-year Regional
Temperature History of Southeast Tibet Derived from Tree Rings. The Holocene
20(181-190).
Yang, B., X. Kang, J. Liu, A. Bräuning and C. Qin 2009. Annual Temperature History in
Southwest Tibet During the last 400 Years Recorded by Tree Rings. International
Journal of Climatology 30:962-971.
Yao, T., L. Thompson, W. Yang, W. Yu, Y. Gao, X. Guo, X. Yang, K. Duan, H. Zhao, B.
Xu, J. Pu, A. Lu, Y. Xiang, D. B. Kattel and D. Joswiak 2012. Different glacier
status with atmospheric circulations in Tibetan Plateau and surroundings. Nature
Clim. Change advance online publication.
Yao, T., L. G. Thompson, E. Mosley-Thompson, Y. Zhihong, Z. Xingping and P.-N. Lin
1996. Climatological Significance of δ18O in North Tibetan Ice Cores. Journal of
Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 101(D23):29531-29537.
Yasunari, T. J., P. Bonasoni, P. Laj, K. Fujita, E. Vuillermoz, A. Marinoni, P.
Cristofanelli, R. Duchi, G. Tartari and K.-M. Lau 2010. Estimated Impact of
Black Carbon Deposition During Pre-Monsoon Season From Nepal Climate
Observatory: Pyramid Data and Snow Albedo Changes Over Himalayan Glaciers.
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 10(14):6603-6615.
Yasunari, T. J., R. D. Koster, K.-M. Lau, T. Aoki, Y. C. Sud, T. Yamazaki, H. Motoyoshi
and Y. Kodama 2011. Influence of Dust and Black Carbon on the Snow Albedo in

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

References

165

the NASA Goddard Earth Observing System Version 5 Land Surface Model.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 116:D02210.
Yeh, W. and L. Becker 1982. Multiobjective Analysis of Multireservoir Operations.
Water Resources Research 18(5):pp. 1326-1336.
Yu, W. e. a. 2010. Climate Change Risks and Food Security in Bangladesh.
Zahid, A. and S. R. U. Ahmed 2006. Groundwater Resources Development in
Bangladesh: Contribution to Irrigation for Food Security and Constraints to
Sustainability.
Zemp, M., M. Hoelzle and W. Haeberli 2009. Six Decades of Glacier Mass-Balance
Observations: A Review of the Worldwide Monitoring Network. Annals of
Glaciology 50(50):101-111.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

166

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Appendixes

167
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

168

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Appendix A
Workshop Agenda and Participants
Himalayan Glaciers, Hydrology, Climate Change,
and Implications for Water Security
Workshop
October 19-20, 2011

House of Sweden
2900 K Street NW
Washington, DC

Wednesday, October 19, 2011
7:30 A.M.

Breakfast Served

8:00 A.M.

Welcome and Purpose of Workshop

Henry Vaux
University of California, Berkeley

Regional Climate and Meteorology
Moderators: Edward Cook, Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory
William Lau, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
8:30 A.M.

Observed and Projected Changes in
Hydrometeorological Variables over the Indian
Himalayas

Krishna Kumar
Indian Institute of Tropical
Meteorology

8:55 A.M.

Regional Meteorology and Monsoon Dynamics

Arnico Panday
University of Virginia

9:20 A.M.

What do We Know about Snow Darkening
Effects on the Himalayan Glaciers?

9:45 A.M.

Break

10:15 A.M.

Hydroclimate Variability and Change over the
Northern Gangetic Plain and Himalayan Region:
Observations, Simulations, and Projections

Sumant Nigam
University of Maryland

10:40 A.M.

Hydro-Climatic Challenges for Pakistan:
Ideational and Material Drivers

Daanish Mustafa
Kings College London

Teppei Yasunari
NASA Goddard Space Flight
Center

169
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

170

Appendix A

11:05 A.M.

Group Discussion

11:45 A.M.

Continued Discussion over Lunch

Regional Hydrology, Water Supply, Use, and Management
Moderator: Peter Gleick, Pacific Institute
1:00 P.M.

The Glaciers of the Hindu Kush-Himalayan
Region: A Summary of the Science Regarding
Glacier Melt and Retreat in the Himalayan,
Hindu Kush, Karakoram, Pamir, and Tien Shan
Mountain Ranges

Richard Armstrong
University of Colorado

1:25 P.M.

Glacial Lake Outburst Floods

Alton Byers
The Mountain Institute

1:50 P.M.

The Water Towers of Asia: Can we Reconcile
Water Demands for Livelihood in a Changing
Climate?

2:15 P.M.

Under Pressure: International Water
Management Challenges in the Himalayan
Region

2:40 P.M.

Group Discussion

3:20 P.M.

Break

Shama Perveen
Columbia University
David Michel
Stimson Center

Regional Demography
Moderator: Deborah Balk, City University of New York
3:40 P.M.

Overview of Social and Family Demography in
South Asia

Sajeda Amin
Population Council

4:05 P.M.

Regional Population Trends and Environmental
Issues

Malea Hoepf Young
Independent Consultant

4:30 P.M.

Group Discussion

5:15 P.M.

Break

6:00 P.M.

Continued Discussion over Dinner

Thursday, October 20, 2011
7:30 A.M.

Breakfast Served

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Appendix A
8:00 A.M.

171
Inventorying and Monitoring the Recent
Behavior of Afghanistan’s Glaciers

Bruce Molnia
U.S. Geological Survey

Regional Politics
Moderator: Marc Levy, Center for International Earth Sciences Information Network
8:30 A.M.

Resource and Security Links

8:55 A.M.

Group Discussion

9:40 A.M.

Break

Richard Matthew
University of California, Irvine

Risk Factors and Vulnerabilities
Moderator: Elizabeth Malone, Joint Global Change Research Institute
10:00 A.M.

Panel Discussion
Afghanistan

Sanjay Pahuja
World Bank

Bangladesh

Ahsan Uddin Ahmed
Centre for Global Change

Bhutan

Thinley Namgyel
National Environment Commission
Secretariat

China

Jennifer Turner
Woodrow Wilson Center

India

Sumit Ganguly
Indiana University, Bloomington

Nepal

Dipak Gyawali
Nepal Water Conservation Foundation

Pakistan

David Archer
JBA Consulting

12:15 P.M.

Assignments to Working Groups

12:30 P.M.

Pick up Lunch and Break into Working Groups

12:50 P.M.

Working Groups Meet
Working Group 1
Climate and Meteorology

Henry Vaux
University of California, Berkeley

Moderator: Drew Shindell
NASA Goddard Institute of Space Studies
Rapporteur: Balaji Rajagopalan

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

172

Appendix A
University of Colorado
Working Group 2
Hydrology, Water Supply, Use,
and Management

Moderator: Mark Williams
University of Colorado, Boulder
Rapporteur: Bodo Bookhagen
University of California, Santa Barbara

Working Group 3
Demography and Security

Moderator: Robert McDonald
The Nature Conservancy
Rapporteur: Nathalie Williams
University of North Carolina

Working Group 4
Risk Factors and Vulnerabilities

Moderator: James Wescoat
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Rapporteur: Henry Vaux
University of California, Berkeley

2:30

Break

2:45 P.M.

Presentations from Working Group Rapporteurs

3:45 P.M.

Closing Remarks

4:00 P.M.

Workshop Adjourns

Henry Vaux
University of California, Berkeley

Participants
Ahsan Uddin Ahmed, Centre for Global Change
Sajeda Amin, Population Council
David Archer, JBA Consulting
Richard Armstrong, University of Colorado, Boulder
D. James Baker, William J. Clinton Foundation
Bodo Bookhagen, University of California, Santa Barbara
Alton Byers, The Mountain Institute
Tom Carson, iSciences
Ric Cicone, iSciences
Richard Engel, National Intelligence Council
Sumit Ganguly, Indiana University, Bloomington
Dipak Gyawali, Nepal Water Conservation Foundation
Malea Hoepf, Independent Consultant
Krishna Kumar, Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology
Richard Marston, U.S. Department of State
Richard Matthew, University of California, Irvine
Mary Melnyk, U.S. Agency for International Development
David Michel, Stimson Center
PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Appendix A

173

Bruce Molnia, U.S. Geological Survey
Daanish Mustafa, Kings College London
Thinley Namgyel, National Environment Commission Secretariat
Sumant Nigam, University of Maryland
Sanjay Pahuja, World Bank
Arnico Panday, University of Virginia
Shama Perveen, Columbia University
Balaji Rajagopalan, University of Colorado, Boulder
John Steinbruner, University of Maryland
Andrew Taber, The Mountain Institute
Jennifer Turner, Woodrow Wilson Center
Nathalie Williams, University of North Carolina
Teppei Yasunari, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
Committee Members
Henry J. Vaux, Jr. (Chair), University of California, Berkeley
Deborah Balk, Baruch College of the City University of New York
Edward R. Cook, Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory
Peter Gleick, Pacific Institute for Studies in Development, Environment and Security
William K.-M. Lau, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
Marc Levy, Center for International Earth Sciences Information Network
Elizabeth L. Malone, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory Joint Global Change
Research Institute at the University of Maryland
Robert McDonald, The Nature Conservancy
Drew Shindell, NASA Goddard Institute of Space Studies
James L. Wescoat, Jr., Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Mark W. Williams, University of Colorado, Boulder
NRC Staff
Lauren Brown
Edward Dunlea
Chris Elfring
Shelly Freeland
Laura Helsabeck
Malay Majmundar
Daniel Muth
Paul Stern

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

174

Appendix A

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Appendix B
Summaries of Workshop Presentations
Observed and Projected Changes in Hydrometeorological Variables over the Indian
Himalayas
K. Krishna Kumar, Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology
The Indian Himalayas can be divided into different sections: western, central, and
eastern; this presentation focused on comparing and contrasting these regions. There is
considerable complexity involved in observing changes over the Indian Himalayas. Most
of the observations on projected changes in hydrometeorological variables are from the
past 10-15 years, including the APHRODITE dataset, which has great promise. Most of
the western Himalayas get precipitation in the winter, whereas the central region gets the
most precipitation in the monsoon season. The eastern and central regions, dominated by
the monsoon, show a decline in precipitation over the past ~50 years. The west does not
show a trend in precipitation. Temperature, however, shows a general warming trend,
over the last three decades in particular, but the seasonal monsoon is influential. Several
researchers are collecting tree ring data in India from the past 300-400 years in an attempt
to reconstruct long term climate record. In the western Himalaya, tree ring chronologies
indicate an increase in temperatures—in agreement with the temperature trends observed
over the past 40-50 years in the western region. Trained models seem to capture end of
century climatology well, giving hope for projecting into the future. Models indicate that
in the near term (2020) the foothills show negative rainfall trends. However, further in the
future (2050, 2080) it appears that the precipitation will be enhanced. Models show that
the temperature trends will continue monotonically in the future (+2 °C in 50 years), in
agreement with the results from another model from the IPCC AR4.
Regional Meteorology and Monsoon Dynamics: Patterns, Changes, and Drivers of
Change
Arnico K. Panday, University of Virginia
The dominant precipitation patterns in the Himalayan region are summer
monsoons (in the central and eastern half of the region), some winter rain and snow, and
winter fog as a source of moisture. There are east-west variations and north-south
variations, though the latter are not as great. Evidence shows that temperature is
increasing more rapidly with altitude; however, there are fewer observation stations at
higher elevations, leading to a potential data bias. Over the Ganges Basin, there is an
increase in aerosol haze as well as an increase in fog. Snow cover has decreased, which
has been particularly noted in 2010 and 2011. There is also clear evidence of glacial
retreat in the area, though there are not many studies on how glacier melt affects regional

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

176

Appendix B

precipitation. There are several drivers of change in the area: greenhouse gases, an
increase in aerosols, and a six-fold increase in black carbon emissions. Main sources of
aerosols are biofuels, from wood cookstoves. Forest fires, urban pollution, and dust being
blown from the Thar Desert to the southwest are also contributors. In the Annapurna
region, there is a strong build up of haze with heavy convection on the south side. The
Kali Gandaki Valley is a very open connection to the Tibetan Plateau; this could be a
major route of transport of aerosols to the plateau and the glaciers.
What do we Know About Snow Darkening Effects on Himalayan Glaciers?
Teppei J. Yasunari, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
Absorbing aerosols such as dust, black carbon (BC), and organic carbon (OC) are
well known warming factors in the atmosphere. When aerosols deposit on snow, it causes
darkening of snow, causing absorption of more energy at the surface, leading to
accelerated melting of snow. If this happens to Himalayan glacier surfaces, the melting
may contribute to mass balance changes, though the mass balance itself is a complicated
issue. There are limited observations of the effect of snow darkening on glaciers, but
most of our knowledge is the result of model simulations. Ice core measurements of black
carbon show much higher concentrations in recent years (1995-present). However, since
1860, there is not an overall trend of an increase in dust. Black carbon satellite data over
the region is still limited, and most of the snow samples measuring black carbon are from
the eastern side of the region (e.g., in China). These snow samples show “rings” of very
clear deposition that can help track levels of black carbon and dust. The black layers
correspond to the spring season (when the atmospheric concentration of black carbon is
higher). Though such studies show an increasing trend, we must be careful to integrate
measurements to account for seasonality. The NASA GEOS-5 model simulations show
very large deposition of black carbon in the Himalayan snowpack—much larger than
anywhere else in the world. Some studies suggest that this has significantly affected the
albedo of the snowpack. This seems to correlate to studies that are showing increases in
snow surface temperature and decreases in the snow water equivalent.
Hydroclimate Variability and Change over the Northern Gangetic Plain and
Himalayan Region
Sumant Nigam, University of Maryland, College Park
Analysis of the 20th century observational record can yield insights about future
variability and change in the region. Models are not yet able to cover the regional
hydroclimate, but the observational record itself has a lot of information that has not been
sufficiently mined. AR4 simulations show that various climate products do not agree with
each other (or the observations) regarding local trends. As such, there is a widely
divergent agreement on projection models. Models can only produce the very broad
features of climate and cannot resolve the specifics. However, this does not mean that the
climate system cannot be resolved for the natural and secular impacts. Regressions of
principle large scale climate events, such as El Nino, monsoon, etc., over the last century

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Appendix B

177

can show robust trends that can be used to reconstruct variables of interest (e.g.,
temperature and precipitation). Surface temperature is only captured broadly, and a
latitudinal increase is observed in the region. If the natural variability can be unraveled
from secular change components, analysis of the 20th century observational record could
yield insights about future variability and change. There are several techniques to tease
out the actual physical components from larger variability. For example, one can look at
trends using observations for the full 20th century and the last 60 years. The 60-year
trends show decadal variability most likely coming from ENSO. The century long trend
analysis does not show these trends.
Hydroclimatic Challenges for Pakistan: Ideational and Material Drivers
Daanish Mustafa, King’s College London
Water has multiple values in all cultures beyond its obvious use for livelihoods
and economic value generation. Most modern water management systems in the world
tend to be indifferent to the multiple, cultural, spiritual, aesthetic, and identity values that
are nevertheless important to water users. There is considerable uncertainty regarding
specific climate scenarios at the country scale; but it is certain that past climatic normals
will not continue into the future. Climate change for Pakistan, as in the rest of the world,
will involve decisions on water management in a context where past trends are no longer
effective guides for future action. Pakistan in particular has suffered some dramatic and
unusual hazards over the past decade, ranging from a multi-year drought in Western
Pakistan to relatively unusual tropical depressions and cyclones hitting Southern
Pakistan. Floods in the main stem Indus River in northwestern Pakistan are extremely
rare; the historic 2010 floods were one such occurrence. Pakistan has the largest
contiguous surface irrigation system in the world. Much of water entering the system is
withdrawn for irrigation purposes, reducing the amount of water available to flush the
system. This leads to a reduction of channel capacity, which was one of the factors in the
floods of 2010. Incorporation of concerns about differential vulnerability, environmental
quality, and social equity will be critical to building a climate resilient future for Pakistan.
Pakistani water managers will have to incorporate local people’s multiple values for
water within their management paradigms and seek to realize multiple social objectives
from Pakistan’s water systems beyond just economic growth.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

178

Appendix B

The Glaciers of the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region: A Summary of the Science
Regarding Glacier Melt and Retreat in the Himalayan, Hindu Kush, Karakoram,
Pamir, and Tien Shan Mountain Ranges
Richard L. Armstrong, University of Colorado, Boulder
Many of the glaciers in the Himalaya are retreating, especially at the lower
elevations in the eastern Himalaya. However, there is no spatially comprehensive or
region-wide evidence to support the claim that the glaciers of the Himalaya are retreating
faster than any other location in the world. Data are sparse in the region, but the most
common is terminus location. The terminus is a point measurement intended to describe
the glacier but it does not do an adequate job of describing the entire system. Conditions
in the region contrast between the east and the west; data in the region should be
compiled. In the east, the river runoff system is dominated by the monsoon. As you move
to the west, glacier ice and seasonal snow play a much bigger role. In the west, both the
seasonal snowcover and glacier volumes are much more stable that they are in the east.
The fact that glaciers across the Himalaya may not be disappearing at as rapid a rate as
had been previously thought does not in any way reduce the need for mitigation and
adaptation to the response of these glacier systems to climate change in the region. In the
short term, well-planned management, conservation, and efficient use of water currently
available are certainly as important as any changes that may take place in the regional
climate in the near future.
Glacial Lakes and Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) in the Hindu-Kush
Himalaya
Alton C. Byers, The Mountain Institute
As glaciers have melted in the Hindu Kush-Himalaya (HKH) and Andes,
hundreds of new glacier lakes have formed behind dams usually consisting of soil and
loose boulders. These lakes present a risk of glacial lake outburst floods (GLOFs).
GLOFs often cause large loss of life and property downstream. Glacial lakes can become
dangerous because they are held at bay by fragile terminal moraines that are susceptible
to collapse (earthquakes, slides, etc.). When this breaks, the result is a GLOF. When
overhanging ice is present, it can fall, and water can go over the wall. In terms of
mitigation possibilities for this type of event, the Andes provide a good example.
Between 1940 and 1950 they had several of these sorts of floods killing 10,000 people. In
response, the government started working on how to control these floods through the
fortification of the terminal moraine with a drainpipe or drilling through bedrock to create
a canal to lower the lake level and use the water. A workshop and field expedition were
held to discuss whether these technologies might be applicable in Nepal, and researcher
discovered the value of local knowledge. The team formed a Global Glacial Lake
Partnership to promote and enhance collaboration and communication between scientists.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Appendix B

179

Himalayas, the Water Towers of Asia: Can we Reconcile Water Demands for
Livelihood in a Changing Climate?
Shama Perveen, Columbia University
The Himalayan region contains the largest area of glaciers, permafrost and the
largest freshwater resources outside the poles. It is the source of ten of Asia’s largest
rivers and more than a billion people depend on the river flows for drinking water,
irrigation, hydropower, and tourism. Already the seasonality of the supply and the
increasing demand are not well reconciled. If snowmelt begins early and summer is
longer, this will affect subsequent downstream uses. To combat this, you can either
conserve or store water. The region is losing groundwater according to GRACE data and
we do not know much about recharge. Thus, the groundwater profile is incomplete. In
India, there is a proposal for a “linking” project, moving “surplus” water from the
Himalayan rivers to the “deficient” peninsular rivers. It was estimated that this would
include nine large dams, 24 small dams, and 12,500 canals and cost 200 billion USD. The
proposal did not include a feasibility study, and did not account for seasonal spikes in
hydrographs. The capacity for the links have not even a tenth the capacity needed to carry
peak flow. Another challenge for water resources in the region is sedimentation, where
the sediment discharge is the highest in the world. There are large knowledge gaps in the
Himalayas hindering educated management, including data, the well-coordinated sharing
of knowledge, the remoteness of glaciers, seismic risks, and uncertainties in time and
space scales, and diversity of uses/users.
Under Pressure: International Water Management Challenges in the Himalayan
Region
David Michel, The Stimson Center
Water managers across the Himalayan region will confront a host of overlapping
socio-economic, environmental, and policy challenges as they strive to fulfill their
societies’ future water needs. In many of the great rivers that rise in the Hindu Kush
Himalayan mountains–the Amu Darya, Ganges, Indus, Yellow–total withdrawals nearly
equal or even surpass long-term flow balances. Water flows across borders throughout
the region, and these rivers are “allocated” or distributed. With population growth in
India, Nepal, Pakistan, and Afghanistan and changes in dietary patterns, the demand for
food will increase. To account for this, irrigation is speculated to increase by 10 percent.
Non-agricultural water use will also increase. Projected water deficits vary from country
to country and basin to basin, without considering climate change, which would increase
the severity of the situation. For example, there are limited options for adaptability on the
Indus. Major infrastructure projects in the Himalayas are commencing to increase water
storage, many of them occur in interesting political areas. Water wars are an extreme
outcome. Water can also lead to cooperative efforts. However, pressures may be greater
than have been accounted for in the past. Many treaties don’t have mechanisms to
account for water instability and they do not include key players (such as China or
Afghanistan).

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

180

Appendix B

Demographic Trends, Social Trends, and Possible Futures
Sajeda Amin, Population Council
People have always moved in response to climate. This is not a new phenomenon.
Internal migration tends to be to urban areas, though refugees also migrate internationally
(e.g., to London, Japan, Saudi Arabia, and India). The climate conversation is dominated
by discussions of low elevation coastal zones, and in this area of the world, there is very
little conversation of migration and the associated human rights. Fertility trends in South
Asia are declining generally across the board and are stabilizing. However, Pakistan is
“lagging” behind in this respect. Infant mortality is also declining (highest rate in
Bangladesh). The percent of population in urban areas is growing steadily. Pakistan has
the lowest level of female labor, and there is not much movement in female labor force
participation. Education levels have improved dramatically, and gender participation has
nearly reached parity. There has also been a shift from agriculture to the service sector
within the labor force, hence urban migration. Urban growth in Bangladesh is largely in
environmentally vulnerable areas.
Regional Population Trends and Environmental Issues
Malea Hoepf, Independent Consultant
The countries fed by the Himalayan glaciers have a broad range of demographic
histories and futures. All of the countries have experienced dramatic fertility declines
over the last half century, the result of various social and policy changes, ranging from
China’s “One Child Policy,” to Bangladesh’s approach that paired government support
with improved services and social marketing, to Pakistan’s less successful policies which
leave it with one of the highest fertility rates in Asia. These countries also have different
population-environment interactions, sometimes pairing traditionally developed country
concerns, such as growing carbon emissions, and developing country challenges of
feeding large population with food grown from degraded land and diminishing water
supplies. The challenges in these countries to handle demographic change and address
environmental degradation have important implications for adapting to a changing
environment, reducing the risk of conflict, and alleviating poverty for their people in the
decades to come.
Inventorying and Monitoring the Recent Behavior of Afghanistan’s Glaciers
Bruce Molnia, United States Geological Survey
The U.S. Geological Survey’s nationwide investigation of the water resources of
Afghanistan has components focused on characterizing the relationship between glaciers
and Afghanistan’s water resources, determining the recent behavior of the country’s
glaciers, and understanding the response of Afghanistan’s glaciers to changing climate.
GIS analysis, a supervised classification, and a remote sensing assessment, are being
conducted to determine the number, location, size, area, aspect, and many other

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Appendix B

181

parameters of Afghanistan’s glaciers. At low elevations, many glaciers have already
disappeared. The mid-range altitudes show complex behaviors in glaciers: debris
covered; transient water; stagnant. High elevation glaciers are not significantly affected at
this time. In the Karakorum Range, the dynamics are different and 65 percent of the
glaciers are advancing. In northeast Afghanistan, water delivery is affected by glacial
runoff. There is a large mobile water component that may be increasing with increasing
temperatures, which gives potential for flooding. The amount of glacier melt compared to
snowfall and rain in the area is still being determined. In this area, snow is significant, but
it is hard to quantify.
Environment-Security Links
Richard Matthew, University of California, Irvine
It is very difficult to model how changes in the environment affect political
stability. There is agreement that the environment is a security issue, and the prevailing
opinion is that climate change will lead to more resource conflicts. There is much
uncertainty, however, and resource scarcity could lead to more cooperation rather than
conflict. It can also spark ingenuity. Certain countries are particularly vulnerable to
climate change. In this region, population is growing, resources are becoming scarce, and
many of the states are high on the Failed State Index, a measure of how readily a
government can provide services. Thus, though climate change will undoubtedly affect
this region, it is difficult to say whether it is the issue that will push these systems over a
threshold, or be a small player in an otherwise stressed system. Nonetheless, the
implications are large and varied (terrorism, development factors, water scarcity,
agricultural failure, etc.). In many South Asian countries, problems are exacerbated by
climate change, but many problems are associated with misused resources and ignoring
environmental regulations; poor strategies and decisions can create vulnerabilities that
climate change may magnify.
Strategic Options for Addressing Climate Change and Water Security Risks in
Afghanistan
Sanjay Pahuja, World Bank
In Afghanistan, rapid growth in the Kabul area means demand growth for
household and hydropower and industrial water uses. Hydropower development is only 5
to 10 percent of its potential, but years of conflict have left the power grids severely
damaged. The growth of the mining industry is raising demand for water. Only 4 to 5
percent of agricultural land is irrigated, although the majority of Afghans depend upon
agriculture. Even modest improvements in regional water management and infrastructure
can lead to expansions in both energy and food production. International agreements exist
for five river basins, but changing conditions will likely test them. Ongoing political and
military conflict hinders improvement, but many water-management projects (most of
them large scale) are under consideration by international aid donors. Insufficient water
for allocation, inadequate financing, and limited human resources have resulted in

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

182

Appendix B

stagnation in preparation and implementation. A system-wide perspective is critically
needed, to include both large-scale and small-scale efforts, but Afghanistan, as a “least
developed country” has little capacity to take this perspective.
Bangladesh: Climate Risk and Vulnerabilities
Ahsan Uddin Ahmed, Centre for Global Change
Bangladesh has special water-related vulnerabilities, including a high population
density in an area vulnerable to flooding and sea level rise, a dependence on upstream
countries for water supply, and important regional water quality challenges arising from
local groundwater contaminated by natural and human contaminants. Social conditions
are improving, including education (e.g., increasing female enrollment in primary and
secondary schools, and increasing literacy among farmers), skills enhancement, and an
economy growing at about 6 percent annually. Food security is an issue for the growing
population, although progress has been made in developing agricultural products to defy
climate variability and change.
Bhutan: Climate Risk and Vulnerabilities
Thinley Namgyel, National Environment Commission, Bhutan
Bhutan has plenty of water at the national level but experiences local and seasonal
shortages. Hydropower accounts for 21 percent of its GDP and almost 100 percent of its
electricity; Bhutan’s goal is to install 10,000 MW by 2020 against the 1480 MW in 2011.
This ambitious target is unlikely to be met because of controversy over large-scale hydro
development, financial constraints, and uncertainties about future hydrologic conditions.
Seasonal differences result in winter shortages, and competition for water from small
water sources often leads to conflicts between communities during the irrigation season.
Because of its upstream location, Bhutan is especially vulnerable to climatic changes that
increase seasonal flood risks, including flash floods during the monsoon season, with
damage to infrastructure, property, and lives. Bhutan also faces risks associated with
glacier lake outburst floods, with 25 of its 1,674 glacial lakes at risk for floods. Bhutan
has limited resources to deal with these issues; it is designated as a “least developed
country,” small, landlocked, in debt, and with only a nascent private sector.
Parliamentary democracy was introduced in Bhutan only in 2008.
China: Climate Risk and Vulnerabilities
Jennifer Turner, Woodrow Wilson Center
China’s water-related issues have the potential to undermine its growth. Seventy
percent of its energy comes from coal mines located largely in the north, and coal uses 20
percent of the country’s water. China sees its priorities as developing new supply rather
than improving water management. This includes major efforts to move water from the
southern watersheds to the north and developing and diverting waters from upstream

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Appendix B

183

basins without regard for downstream impacts. China may be building a significant
number of new large dams in the coming years, but some existing dams are already
underutilized because of diminished water supply. China has not been a central
participant in regional water commissions or planning activities, preferring to pursue
water development without consultation with other affected nations. Other challenges
include territorial conflicts over shared watersheds such as the Sichuan Glacier dispute
with India.
Border Dispute in the Himalayan Region
Sumit Ganguly, Indiana University, Bloomington
The Sino-Indian border along the Himalayas remains one of the most militarized
areas of the world. The militarization of this region stems from an unresolved border
dispute that has its origins in British colonial border policies from the nineteenth century.
Despite multiple bilateral negotiations on the border dispute, little progress has been
made toward its resolution. In recent years China has expanded the scope of its claims
along portions of the Sino-Indian border. Not surprisingly, this has contributed to greater
troop concentrations resulting in greater environmental stresses to the area. Finally, the
dispute may take on even greater salience as China plans to divert water from and
construct hydro-electric stations in Tibet.
Toad’s Eye Perspective: The Missing Element in Climate Change Debates
Dipak Gyawali, Nepal Academy of Science and Technology and Water Conservation
Foundation
Nepal’s 10-year Maoist insurrection ended in 2007, but its effects linger in the
inability of the government to write a constitution and in its weak capacity to enact or
implement policies and programs. Like Afghanistan and Bhutan, it is designated as a
“least developed country.” There are planned large-scale dams, but small-scale,
community-centered water management would be preferable to top-down planned
projects and might provide greater flexibility in the face of climate change. The country
has an active mountain-climbing and tourism industry (although agriculture dominates
the economy), with glaciers being a strong attraction in the high mountain landscapes.
Pakistan: Climate Risk and Vulnerabilities
David Archer, JBA Consulting
The viability of Pakistan’s economy depends on the state of the Indus River.
Apart from the narrow ribbon of green along the Himalayan range, Pakistan is largely
desert and semi-desert. As a predominantly agricultural economy it depends on the Indus
River for irrigation of both food and cash crops. In a normal year, about 75 percent of the
river inflow is diverted and in a drought year only a trickle of fresh water reaches the
Indian Ocean. The Indus Basin Irrigation System (IBIS) irrigates 80 percent of Pakistan’s

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

184

Appendix B

approximately 22 million hectares of farmland. Hence changes in flow in the River Indus
arising from climate change or other causes, or in the balance between water supply and
demand (mainly for irrigation) send a ripple effect through the entire Pakistan economy
and have implications for food security, poverty and prosperity, and ultimately for
personal and state security.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Appendix C
Glacier Measurement Methods
GLACIOLOGIC MASS BALANCE MEASUREMENT
In the glaciologic method, a network of stakes and pits are placed on the glacier
surface and used to measure the change in surface level while taking into account
snow/firn/ice density. Comparing measurements between two fixed dates yields an
annual mass balance, while comparing measurements at the end of the ablation and
accumulation seasons yields a seasonal mass balance (Racoviteanu et al., 2008). The
mass balance for the glacier is then estimated by multiplying the changes in mass balance
at each sampling point with the area that point represents, and summing the product over
the entire glacier. This method provides detailed information on the mass balance spatial
variation and is considered the more accurate than other methods (Kaser et al., 2003).
The glaciological method may achieve the greatest accuracy and provides the
investigator insight for the field conditions, it is based on repeated field measurements,
which have to be carried out under sometimes rather challenging conditions. These
challenges include logistical constraints in remote areas, inclement weather conditions
including cold temperatures and high winds, crevasses, avalanches and icefalls, and
rockfall from surrounding terrain. The rate of data acquisition is slow and the process
expensive (Kaser et al., 2003). Thus, only a few dozen such records in the world exist
that cover significant periods of time (i.e., decades; WGMS, 2008; Zemp et al., 2009),
and there are currently no such long-term records for the HKH region (Kaser et al.,
2006).
GEODETIC MASS BALANCE MEASUREMENT
The geodetic method measures elevation changes of the glacial surface over time
from various digital elevation models (DEMs) constructed over the entire glacier surface
(Racoviteanu et al., 2008). This method can be applied using topographic maps, DEMs
obtained by aircraft and satellite imagery, and by airborne laser scanning (Kaser et al.,
2003). The accuracy of this method depends on: 1) the interpolation method used to
derive a DEM; 2) errors introduced by any change in spatial resolution; 3) biases inherent
in the remote sensing-derived DEMs; 4) density assumptions (Racoviteanu et al., 2008).
Errors in the original DEMs propagate with each calculation, and may introduce large
errors in the end result. Because of these issues, it is recommended that the geodetic
method only be used for mass balance measurements on decadal or longer time scales
(Kaser et al., 2003; Racoviteanu et al., 2008).

185
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

186

Appendix C

HYDROLOGICAL MASS BALANCE MEASUREMENT
The hydrological mass balance can also be used to estimate the glacier mass
balance. The hydrological method uses a water-balance approach to compute glacier
mass balance. The estimated net precipitation in the basin is subtracted from the net
runoff to compute the water storage within the basin, which is then interpreted as due to
changes in glacier mass balance (Braithwaite, 2002). While this approach is considered to
provide only a crude approximation and is not generally recommended (Barry, 2006), it
was used for many years for the basin of the Grosse Aletsch in Switzerland (PSFG, 1967,
1973). The hydrological approach is difficult to use in the HKH area because of limited
precipitation and discharge measurements. However, the approach does hold promise as
more basins become instrumented with automatic weather stations and automated
measurements of discharge height, as demonstrated for the Langtang Basin in Nepal by
the recent ICIMOD field class on glacier mass balance measurements.
REMOTE SENSING MEASUREMENTS
Remote sensing measurements are based on information gained by aerial sensing
technologies installed on aircraft and satellites. Scientists are increasingly able to measure
glacier properties over larger areas and longer time spans due to the increased availability
of imagery from remote sensing platforms. Remote sensing yields information about
glacier properties including glacier area, length, surface elevation, surface flow fields,
accumulation/ablation rates, albedo, equilibrium line altitude (ELA), accumulation area
ratio, and the mass balance gradient. The ELA, accumulation area ratio, and the mass
balance gradient respond to annual changes in temperature, precipitation, and humidity
and are therefore important for mass balance monitoring. Changes in glacier area and
terminus positions over timescales of several decades, which are relatively easy to
determine from remote sensing imagery, have been used as indicators of a glacier’s
response to climate forcing (Barry, 2006).
Remote sensing uses sensors that detect solar energy reflected by Earth’s features
as well as the emission of the Earth’s own thermal energy (Figure C.1). Wavelength
ranges (or bands) of interest to remote sensing of glaciers generally include visible light
(VIS ranging from about 0.45 to 0.75 m), near-infrared (NIR ranging from 0.75 to 1.4
m), short-wavelength infrared (SWIR ranging from 1.4 to 3 m), and thermal infrared
(TIR ranging from about 8 to 15 m). Sensors record the brightness temperature within a
defined band that depends on the characteristics of the specific sensor, as illustrated for
two different sensors in Figure C.1. For example, Band 2 of Landsat1 7 records the
brightness temperature from 0.53 to 0.61 m, often mapped as the blue band.

1

Landsat is a series of Earth-observing of satellite missions jointly managed by NASA and the
USGS. More information about the program is available at http://landsat.gsfc.nasa.gov/.
PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Appendix C

187

FIGURE C.1 Wavelength regions and bandwidths for two remote sensing satellites,
Landsat7 and ASTER. SOURCE: NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and U.S.
Geological Survey.
Snow and ice are characterized by: 1) high reflectivity in the visible wavelengths;
2) medium reflectivity in the near-infrared; 3) low reflectivity and high emissivity in the
thermal infrared; and 4) low absorption and high scattering in the microwave
(Racoviteanu et al., 2008). Increasing amounts of black carbon quickly reduce the albedo
of snow and ice.
The spatial resolution of a remote sensing image is critical to obtaining glacial
properties in mountainous terrain, such as the ELA. A pixel size of 500 m on a side (e.g.
MODIS2) means that, in general, the remote sensing information can only detect changes
that occur in lengths greater than 500 m.
Newer sensors can acquire data at medium spatial resolutions (5 to 90 m in
multispectral mode), with larger swath widths (185 km for Landsat and 60 km for
ASTER3) and short revisit times (16 days for ASTER). These capabilities allow regular
glacier mapping over extensive areas. The thermal band of Landsat Enhanced Thermal
Mapper Plus (EMT+)4 (10.4 to 12.5 m, at 60 m pixel size) and the multispectral thermal
bands of ASTER (8.125 to 11.65 m, at 90 m pixel size) could potentially distinguish
debris-cover on glaciers. The ASTER, SPOT55, IRS-1C6, and CORONA KH-4, KH 4A
and KH 4B7 can acquire stereoscopic images, which in turn provide elevation data that
2

The Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer is an instrument aboard the Terra (EOS
AM) and Aqua (EOS PM) satellites. More information about the instrument is available at
http://modis.gsfc.nasa.gov/.
3
The Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer is an instrument
aboard the Terra (EOS AM) satellite. More information about the instrument is available at
http://asterweb.jpl.nasa.gov/.
4
More information about this instrument is available at
http://landsat.gsfc.nasa.gov/about/etm+.html.
5
A fifth-generation Earth observation satellite launched in 2002; the series of SPOT satellites
were initiated by the French space agency and are run by Spot Image base in Toulouse, France.
6
India’s second generation remote sensing satellite.
7
A series of U.S. reconnaissance satellites launched between 1959 and 1972.
PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

188

Appendix C

can be used for geodetic mass balance estimates (Racoviteanu et al., 2008). Thus, newer
sensors with pixel sizes on the order of 3 to 30 m provide more accurate representations
(and changes over time) of such parameters as glacial area, location of the glacier
terminus, and location of the ELA.
Snow and ice are distinct from surrounding terrain in clear weather. Thick cloud
cover can complicate such distinction. However, measurements of the 1.6 to 1.7 m
wavelengths (wavelength band 4 of ASTER) can overcome this issue. At these
wavelengths, clouds are reflective but snow and ice are absorbing (Racoviteanu et al.,
2008). Techniques including single band ratios and the normalized difference snow index
(NDSI) use the high brightness values of snow and ice in the visible wavelengths to
distinguish them from darker rock, soil, or vegetation (Racoviteanu et al., 2008).8 The
single band ratio and NDSI techniques are also fast and robust, making them relatively
easy to automate over extensive areas. Challenges to automatic mapping of glaciers using
band ratios include: 1) the presence of pro-glacial and supra-glacier lakes; 2) the presence
of fresh snow on surfaces other than a glacier; and 3) debris-cover on glaciers
(Racoviteanu et al., 2008). Lakes are misidentified as glacial ice because liquid water and
ice have similar bulk optical properties in the visible and near-infrared wavelength.
Glaciers always have snow above the ELA. However, surrounding bedrock, moraines,
tundra, and other surfaces may also have snow. These snow-covered surfaces can easily
be mis-classified as part of a glacier. Care must be taken to discriminate snow on
surrounding areas from snow on glaciers. Often multiple years of imagery are needed to
do so.
Debris cover is one of the greatest challenges in remote sensing of glaciers. In the
visible and near-infrared wavelengths, debris cover has optical properties very similar to
the surrounding moraines. Automated methods of analyzing spectral information are
ineffective in mapping ice covered by debris. However, manual digitization is timeconsuming and subject to human error. Thus, debris on glaciers may result in underrepresenting glacial area and over-calculating rates of glacier retreat.

8

NDSI is calculated as (VIS-SWIR) / (VIS+SWIR), where VIS is band 1 of ASTER (0.52 – 0.6
m) at 15 m and SWIR is band 4 of ASTER (1.6 – 1.7 m) at 30 m.
PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Appendix D
Disaster Agencies and Databases
A greater understanding of the occurrence and impacts of natural disasters in the
region and the capabilities of response in the region can be gained from a variety of
sources. These include national and international databases; regional international
intergovernmental and international nongovernmental organizations (INGO) and
programs; and national disaster agencies.
International Disaster Databases
There have been increasing efforts to compile international datasets on natural
disasters worldwide, five of which are examined here (c.f., the review of hazards in South
Asia by Gupta, S. and Muralikrishna, 2010). These datasets differ in coverage and data
quality; they have different filters, strengths, and limitations (see reviews by Beckman,
2009; Gall et al., 2009). While these databases have some overlap, each offers different
information and insights into disasters that have risen to an international level of
recognition. Damage and loss estimation is particularly uneven. The ECLAC (2003)
methodology is sometimes used for assessing damage and needs in major disasters, but it
is not consistently applied for database development.1
Currently all databases need to be searched and compared independently. They
include different types of hazards, and in some cases different definitions of
hydroclimatic hazards (Table D.1). They present nationally aggregated data, and it is
therefore important to compare them with national databases. The Center for Research on
the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED) has reported on efforts to “harmonize” national
databases in Asia (Below et al., 2010). One international database, for example, the
DesInventar Global Assessment Report (GAR), hosts a national disaster database that
will be discussed under national programs.

1

There are other INGOs that have natural hazards programs, e.g., UNDP’s GRIP (www.gripweb.org). An
important effort for detailed forensic case study analysis is under development (Burton, 2010; IRDR,
2011).

189
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

190

Appendix D

Table D.1: Types of Natural Hazards Recorded by International Dataset
CRED EM-DAT
Dartmouth Flood
GAR
GLIDE
Observatory
Database
Drought
Dam release +
Drought
Drought
Heavy Rain
Earthquake (seismic Dam/Levy, break or Cold Wave
Cold Wave
activity)
release
Epidemic
Monsoon Rain
Avalanche
Earthquake
Extreme
Torrential Rain
Earthquake
Epidemic
temperature
Flood
Tropical Cyclone
Fire
Extreme
temperature
Insect infestation
Tropical Storm
Flood
Flash Flood
Mass movement dry Rain and snowmelt
Forest Fire
Flood
Mass Movement
Snowmelt
Frost
Heat Wave
Wet
Storm
Tidal surge
Hail Storm
Land Slide
Wildfire
Heat Wave
Mud Slide
Landslide
Severe Local Storm
Liquefaction
SLIDE (use LS/
AV/MS instead)
Rains
Snow Avalanche
Snow Storm
Tornadoes
Storm
Tropical Cyclone
Strong Wind
Tsunami
Thunderstorm
Volcano
Wave/Surge(use
TS/SS instead)
Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters EM-DAT Database
(CRED EM-DAT)
The Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED) at Louvain,
Belgium compiles the most comprehensive public-access database worldwide, the EMDAT international disaster database.2 It has coverage from 1900 to the present for ten
major categories of hazards (Table D.1). It also provides individual Country Profiles.3
Global Identifier Number (GLIDE)
The Asian Disaster Reduction Center in Kobe, Japan has developed a uniform
numbering system for disaster data management. Each disaster that meets a set of criteria
2
3

www.emdat.be
cf. country profiles on UN ISDR’s Prevention Web: www.preventionweb.net

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Appendix D

191

is issued a Global Identifier Number (GLIDE) and catalogued using this number.4
GLIDE numbers are used by disaster-related organizations worldwide (for example,
CRED). A strength of the GLIDE system is that it differentiates among many types of
hazards (Table D.1). One weakness is that it does not provide consistent comments on
damages; or separate losses of life, livelihoods, and property into separate datafields. The
GLIDE data do not indicate increasing disaster frequency over the past decade; however,
they do support other observations about the relative high frequency of flood and storm
events.
Munich RE NATHAN Database
The Munich RE NATHAN Database is a proprietary database used for insurance,
investment, and strategic planning purposes.5 Its historical archive includes 28,000
datasets with increasingly comprehensive coverage after 1980. Its annual map of losses in
2010 indicates that a large proportion of hazards in South Asia have been meteorological
or hydrological events. Although some NATHAN data are publically accessible, some
detailed NATHAN data are not publically available and were therefore not used
extensively in this report.
ReliefWeb
The U.N. Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs maintains a
comprehensive portal for humanitarian concerns worldwide called ReliefWeb.6 As of
August 19, 2011, Afghanistan had the largest number of “Updates” in the region. Most of
Afghanistan’s entries are conflict related, for which it ranks first worldwide with 27,231
Updates, followed by Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo. Pakistan also has a
high number of updates for both natural disasters and complex emergencies. In 2010,
ReliefWeb reported the following number of humanitarian entries for the countries in the
study area: Afghanistan, 27,674; Bangladesh, 4,838; Bhutan, 159; India, 10,201; Nepal,
6,089; Pakistan, 17,120.
Dartmouth Flood Observatory Database and Flood Remote Sensing Databases
The Dartmouth Flood Observatory Database7, now hosted at the University of
Colorado, Boulder, has compiled and mapped major flood events worldwide since 1985.
Other agency websites provide detailed remotely sensed flood imagery, e.g., the Global
Flood Detection System8; the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s
Operational Significant Event Imagery9; the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration’s Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission or TRMM10; the CREST site11;
4

www.glidenumber.net
www.munichre.com/touch/
6
www.relief.int
7
floodobservatory.colorado.edu
8
www.gdacs.org/flooddetection
9
www.osei.noaa.gov/
10
trmm.gsfc.nasa.gov/
11
oas.gsfc.nasa.gov/CREST/global/
5

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

192

Appendix D

and others. As these data and technologies expand, it will be important to make
comparable investments in integrative field research on the human dimensions of flood
hazards (Guha-Sapir et al., 2011).
Regional Intergovernmental Organizations
and International Nongovernmental Organizations
Regional Intergovernmental Organizations and International Nongovernmental
Organizations that focus on natural hazards and disaster reduction in the South Asia
region offer different perspectives on, and approaches to, natural hazards. While not
intended as an exhaustive list, the following list provides a summary of organizations of
note along with information about their focus:
 Asian Disaster Preparedness Center. 12 The Asian Disaster Preparedness
Center in Bangkok is a regional organization serving most countries in South
Asia except, it appears, Afghanistan and Bhutan. The center offers
professional training and a clearinghouse of information in association with
the Asian Institute of Technology in Bangkok.
 Asian Disaster Reduction and Response Network. 13 The Asian Disaster
Reduction and Response Network (ADRRN) out of Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia,
is a consortium of 34 NGOs dedicated to humanitarian assistance in the AsiaPacific region, organized to support regional networking and information
sharing.
 Asian Ministerial Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction. This organization
convenes biennial meetings of government ministers in disaster agencies. The
most recent meeting took place in Seoul, Korea in 2010. It focused on disaster
risk reduction through climate change adaptation14; and it was followed by a
biennial conference in Colombo, Sri Lanka.15
 Duryog Nivaran. 16 The Duryog Nivaran is a regional non-governmental
organization based in Colombo Sri Lanka devoted to decentralized disaster
risk reduction, which bears comparison with ADPC’s community-based
approach to disaster risk reduction.
 Integrated Water and Hazard Management Programmes. 17 The International
Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD) is a regional
knowledge development and learning center based in Kathmandu, Nepal. The
center supports three major projects on mountain hydroclimatic hazards in the
Himalayan region:
o Disaster Preparedness in the Himalayas Program is the broadest initiative
in the field.

12

www.adpc.net/2011/
www.adrrn.net/
14
www.amcdrrkorea.org/
15
www.adrc.asia/acdr/2011_index.html
16
www.duryognivaran.org/
17
www.icimod.org/?q=209
13

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Appendix D





193

o The new INDUS Project for Capacity Building for Improved Monitoring
of Snow, Ice and Water Resources brings together scientists from Indus
Basin countries for joint discussions and possible collaboration.
o The HKH-HYCOS project established a Regional Flood Information
System in the Hindu Kush Himalayan area.
SAARC – Disaster Knowledge Network.18 SAARC is the main regional InterGovernmental Organization (IGO) for South Asia. It has added disaster
reduction to its shared concerns, creating a regional center in New Delhi that
networks members and agencies in each country. It has created a knowledge
clearinghouse that includes country profiles with links to policies, institutions,
and resources.
U.N. ESCAP. 19 The U.N.’s Economic and Social Commission for Asia and
the Pacific (ESCAP), in Bangkok has a Committee on Disaster Risk
Reduction that was established in 2009, and is serviced by a Committee on
Information and Communications Technology.
National Disaster Agencies and Databases

Nations in the HKH region have disaster agencies and databases that take a
variety of forms and include different types of information, as discussed here. This is not
intended as an exhaustive list, rather, it is included to provide additional context when
considering the response of the region to natural and hydroclimatic hazards.
 Afghanistan has a cabinet-level Department of Fighting Disasters and a
Department of Red Cross (i.e., two of its 11 government departments). It also has a
National Disaster Management Authority).20 Afghanistan has limited data on
hydroclimatic disasters, its stream gauging only being resumed in the early 2000s after a
two-decade lapse due to armed conflict and civil strife (Mack et al., 2010; World Bank,
2010a). International organizations still report and respond to natural hazards, though
most international appeals and programs address Afghanistan’s pervasive “complex
emergencies” that include civil strife.
 Bangladesh’s Ministry of Food and Disaster Management contains a Disaster
Management and Relief Division. Its Comprehensive Disaster Management Programme
(CDMP) strives to link Disaster Risk Reduction with Climate Change and development
planning (Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, 2010a, b, 2011). A
website search of these agencies and programs indicated no specific references to snow,
ice or glacial hazards, as compared with their emphasis on river and coastal flooding and
sea level rise. For example, Bangladesh has an online list of 41 past disasters (floods
and/or erosion, or cyclones) from 1986 to 200921 and it maintains a “Disaster Incidence
Database” with a GIS interface categorizing floods, cold waves, droughts.22 The
country’s main disaster maps characterize the northern areas as affected by mountain
18

saarc-sadkn.org/countries/india/default.aspx
www.unescap.org/
20
www.andma.gov.af/
21
www.dmb.gov.bd/pastdisaster.html
22
http://www.dmic.org.bd/didb/didb.php
19

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

194

Appendix D

flood hazards along the main river channels with drought hazards off-channel. Below et
al. (2010) reported that one national database had only 71 records and that 62 percent of
them lacked damage data. By comparison, the international CRED EM-DAT dataset for
Bangladesh has 477 records of which only 3.3 percent lack damage data. However, closer
inspection of the Government of Bangladesh’s on-line list of 41 past disasters revealed
that it contains more detailed damage data than CRED EM-DAT.
 Bhutan has a Department of Disaster Management under the Ministry of
Home and Cultural Affairs.23 Its website emphasizes training programs, communitybased disaster risk management, GLOFs (including lowering impounded water levels)24,
and school safety. It also includes a disaster management framework, earthquake
recovery, regional climate risk reduction, and annual plans.
 India’s National Disaster Management Authority was established in 2005
after the catastrophic Gujarat and Kashmir earthquakes.25 Disaster management is
becoming mainstreamed across national policies and programs. A major section of the
Government of India Planning Commission’s current 5-Year Plan for national
development is devoted to the subject (Government of India, 2006a, 2008). India’s
National Institute of Disaster Management26 established in 1995 as part of the
International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction (IDNDR) has aligned itself with the
Indian Statistical Institute in Kolkata for advanced quantitative analysis of disaster risk
and response. It publishes its own journal, publication series, and convenes workshops,
etc.
The subject of hydroclimatic hazards in the Himalaya is addressed in large
measure through additional agencies, e.g., the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
Although India does not currently appear to have a national publically accessible online
disaster database, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation’s Building
Materials and Technology Promotion Council has produced a detailed Vulnerability Atlas
of India with detailed district as well as aggregate data (Government of India, 2006b).
Disaster management is on the concurrent list of the Constitution of India that gives joint
authority to national and state governments. State governments are addressed below, but
none of the states on the left bank of the Ganges River basin affected by HKH flooding
appear to have detailed disaster databases.27 As mentioned elsewhere in this report,
security restrictions on access to streamflow data from India’s international basins
constrain scientific analysis of hydroclimatic risk reduction from the local to state,
national, and international levels.
In other respects, India’s research capacity is the highest in the region. Kapur
(2009) has compiled and analyzed 4,004 natural hazards research publications, limiting
the search to hydroclimatic and geophysical disasters, and excluding related human crises
(e.g., famines) and technological hazards (e.g., environmental pollution spills). India’s
advanced remote sensing programs and meteorological research centers also give it a
vital role in the region as a whole.
23

www.ddm.gov.bt/
www.ddm.gov.bt/?page_id=130.
25
ndma.gov.in/ndma/index.htm
26
nidm.gov.in/default.asp
27
The states of Orissa and Tamil Nadu, which are particularly affected by cyclones and tsunamis, have
detailed disaster loss datasets online at www.desinventar.org.
24

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Appendix D

195

 Nepal’s Ministry of Energy has a Department of Water-Induced Disaster
Prevention.28 Additionally, its Ministry of Environment has a Department of Hydrology
and Meteorology.29 Although not on its national website, Nepal maintains a “Disaster
Information/Inventory Management System (DIMS) (Below et al., 2010). The Nepal data
is publically available on the GAR Database—National Disaster Inventory for Nepal.30
This database has some 16,879 records while CRED EM-DAT includes only 144 for
Nepal and is a case where the national database is superior to the international one.
 Pakistan is undergoing a process of administrative devolution under the 18th
Amendment to its Constitution, enacted in 2010, which shifts many agencies on its
concurrent list of joint federal-provincial authority to an exclusively provincial level of
control. Important hazards-related exceptions include the Pakistan Meteorological
Department under the Ministry of Defense, a Federal Flood Commission under the
Ministry of Water and Power, a Pakistan Centre for Research on Water Resources under
the Ministry of Science and Technology, and the semi-autonomous Water and Power
Development Authority – each of which has responsibility for different aspects of
hydroclimatic hazards management. Devolution of the Ministry of Environment raised
questions about how climate change policies and programs would unfold at the national
level (Aftab, 2011; Ghumman, 2012), but the federal cabinet adopted a national climate
change policy and established a Ministry of Climate Change in 2012. At the same time,
the Ministries of Agriculture and Livestock were devolved, and irrigation has already
been administered at the provincial level. The role of the National Disaster Management
Authority,31 established in 2006, relative to provincial disaster management agencies will
likewise be important – as hydroclimatic hazards cross all of the provincial boundaries in
Pakistan.

28
29

30
31

http://www.dwidp.gov.np
www.dhm.gov.np

gar-isdr.desinventar.net/DesInventar/profiletab.jsp?countrycode=np11
ndma.gov.pk/

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

196

Appendix D

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Appendix E
Acronyms and Abbreviations
ADPC
AOT

Asian Disaster Preparedness Center
Aerosol Optical Thickness

BC

Black Carbon

CALIOP
CALIPSO
CRED
DEMs
DTM

Cloud-Aerosol Lidar with Orthogonal Polarization
Cloud-Aerosol Lidar and Infrared Pathfinder Satellite Observation
Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters
Digital Elevation Models
Digital Terrain Model

EF
EHP
ELA
EPS

Environmental Flow
Elevated Heat Pump
Equilibrium Line Altitude
Expressed Population Signal

FAO
GAR
GHG
GLIDE
GLOFs
GRACE
GRanD
GRUMP

Food and Agriculture Organization
Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction
Greenhouse Gas
GLobal IDEntifier
Great Lakes Operational Forecast System
Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment
Global Reservoir and Dam
Global Rural Urban Mapping Project

HKH

Hindu Kush-Himalayan

ICIMOD
IPCC

International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

LIA
LLOF
masl
MODIS
MSU

Little Ice Age
Landslide Lake Outburst Flood
meters above sea level
Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer
Microwave Sounding Unit

NATHAN
NDSI

Natural Hazards Assessment Network
Normalized Difference Snow Index

197
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

198

Appendix E

NGO
NRC

non-governmental organization
National Research Council

OCHA
OMI

Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
Ozone Measuring Instrument

POP

Persistent Organic Pollutant

SAARC
SST

South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
Sea Surface Temperature

TP

Tibetan Plateau

WGMS
WUAs
FUGs

World Glacier Monitoring Service
Water User Associations
Forest User Groups

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Appendix F
Institutional Oversight
Institutional oversight for this project was provided by:
BOARD ON ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES AND CLIMATE
ANTONIO J. BUSALACCHI, JR. (Chair), University of Maryland, College Park
GERALD A. MEEHL (Vice Chair), National Center for Atmospheric Research
LANCE F. BOSART, State University of New York, Albany
RICHARD CARBONE, National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, Colorado
SHUYI S. CHEN, University of Miami, Florida
KIRSTIN DOW, University of South Carolina, Columbia
GREG S. FORBES, The Weather Channel, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia
LISA GODDARD, Columbia University, Palisades, New York
ISAAC HELD, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Princeton,
New Jersey
ANTHONY JANETOS, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, College Park, Maryland
HAROON S. KHESHGI, ExxonMobil Research and Engineering Company, Annandale, New
Jersey
MICHAEL D. KING, University of Colorado, Boulder
JOHN E. KUTZBACH, University of Wisconsin-Madison
ARTHUR LEE, Chevron Corporation, San Ramon, California
ROBERT J. LEMPERT, The RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, California
ROGER B. LUKAS, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii
SUMANT NIGAM, Earth System Science Interdisciplinary Center, College Park, Maryland
RAYMOND T. PIERREHUMBERT, University of Chicago, Illinois
KIMBERLY PRATHER, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, California
RICH RICHELS, Electric Power Research Institute, Inc., Washington, DC
DAVID A. ROBINSON, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway
KIRK R. SMITH, University of California, Berkeley
JOHN T. SNOW, University of Oklahoma, Norman
CLAUDIA TEBALDI, Climate Central, Princeton, New Jersey
XUBIN ZENG, University of Arizona, Tucson
NRC Staff
CHRIS ELFRING, Director
LAURIE GELLER, Senior Program Officer
EDWARD DUNLEA, Senior Program Officer
MAGGIE WALSER, Program Officer
KATIE THOMAS, Associate Program Officer
DANIEL MUTH, Postdoctoral Fellow
LAUREN BROWN, Research Associate
AMANDA PURCELL, Research Associate

199
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

200

Appendix F

RITA GASKINS, Administrative Coordinator
ROB GREENWAY, Program Associate
SHELLY FREELAND, Senior Program Assistant
RICARDO PAYNE, Senior Program Assistant
ELIZABETH FINKELMAN, Program Assistant
GRAIG MANSFIELD, Financial Associate

WATER SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY BOARD
DONALD I. SIEGEL (Chair), Syracuse University, New York
LISA ALVAREZ-COHEN, University of California, Berkeley
EDWARD J. BOUWER, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD
YU-PING CHIN, The Ohio State University, Columbus
OTTO C. DOERING, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IL
M. SIOBHAN FENNESSY, Kenyon College, Gambier, OH
BEN GRUMBLES, Clean Water America Alliance, Washington, D.C.
GEORGE R. HALLBERG, The Cadmus Group, Inc., Watertown, MA
KENNETH R. HERD, Southwest Florida Water Management District, Brooksville
GEORGE M. HORNBERGER, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN
KIMBERLY L. JONES, Howard University, Washington, D.C.
LARRY LARSON, Association of State Floodplain Managers, Madison, WI
DAVID H. MOREAU, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
DENNIS D. MURPHY, University of Nevada, Reno
MARYLYNN V. YATES, University of California, Riverside
NRC Staff
STEPHEN PARKER, Director
JEFFREY JACOBS, Scholar
LAURA J. EHLERS, Senior Program Officer
STEPHANIE JOHNSON, Senior Program Officer
LAURA J. HELSABECK, Senior Program Officer
JEANNE AQUILINO, Financial and Administrative Associate
ANITA HALL, Senior Program Associate
MICHAEL STOEVER, Research Associate
SARAH BRENNAN, Program Assistant
COMMITTEE ON POPULATION
LINDA J. WAITE (Chair), Department of Sociology, University of Chicago
CHRISTINE BACHRACH, Social Science Research Institute, Duke University and School of
Behavioral and Social Sciences, University of Maryland
EILEEN M. CRIMMINS, Department of Sociology, University of Southern California
PETER J. DONALDSON, Population Council, New York, NY
BARBARA ENTWISLE, Department of Sociology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
JOSHUA R. GOLDSTEIN, Max Planck-Institute for Demographic Research, Rostock,
Germany
CHARLES HIRSCHMAN, Department of Sociology, University of Washington

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Appendix F

201

BARTHÉLÉMY KUATE-DEFO, Department of Demography, University of Montreal
WOLFGANG LUTZ, World Population Program, International Institute for Applied Systems
Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria
DUNCAN THOMAS, Economics Department, Duke Global Health Institute, Duke University
BARBARA B. TORREY, Independent Consultant, Washington, DC
MAXINE WEINSTEIN, Center for Population and Health, Georgetown University
NRC Staff
BARNEY COHEN, Director
LAUDAN ARON, Senior Program Officer
KEVIN KINSELLA, Senior Program Officer
MALAY MAJMUNDAR, Program Officer
KEIKO ONO, Senior Program Associate
BARBARA BOYD, Administrative Associate
DANIELLE JOHNSON, Senior Program Assistant

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

202

Appendix F

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Appendix G
Biographical Sketches
of Committee Members
Henry J. Vaux, Jr. (Chair) is Professor Emeritus of Resource Economics at the
University of California in both Berkley and Riverside. He is also Associate Vice
President Emeritus of the University of California system. He previously served as
director of California’s Center for Water Resources. His principal research interests are
the economics of water use, irrigated agriculture, and water marketing. Prior to joining
the University of California, he worked at the Office of Management and Budget and
served on the staff of the National Water Commission. Dr. Vaux has served on numerous
NRC Committees and was the Chair of the Water Science and Technology Board of the
NRC from 1994 to 2001. He is a National Associate of the National Academies. Dr.
Vaux received an A.B. from the University of California, Davis in biological sciences, an
M.A. in natural resources administration, and an M.S. and Ph.D. in Economics from the
University of Michigan.
Deborah Balk is Professor at the City University of New York (CUNY)’s Baruch School
of Public Affairs and the CUNY Graduate Center in the Sociology and Economics
Programs and Associate Director of the CUNY Institute for Demographic Research. Her
expertise lies in spatial demography and the integration of earth and social science data
and methods to address interdisciplinary policy questions. Her current research focus is
on urbanization, population, poverty, and environmental interactions, in particular
climate change. Prior to joining CUNY in 2006, she was a research scientist at the Center
for International Earth Science Information of Network at Columbia University. There
she was also lead Project Scientist for the NASA-funded Socioeconomic Data and
Applications Center where she worked on large-scale data integration of geographic,
survey, and administrative data. She received her PhD in Demography from the
University of California, Berkeley, and her Master’s Degree in Public Policy, and A.B in
International Relations, from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. She has recently
completed service as a member of the International Union for the Scientific Study of
Population working group on Urbanisation and two National Research Council panels.
She has co-authored numerous papers on population and climate change, including a
recent one on city population forecasts and water scarcity.
Edward R. Cook is a Ewing Research Professor at Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory
of Columbia University. He co-founded the Tree-Ring Laboratory in 1975, which is
dedicated to expanding the use and application of tree-ring research around the world to
improve our understanding of past climate and environmental history. His current
research concentrates on the use of tree-ring data networks to study regional climate,

203
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

204

Appendix G

global climate teleconnections, and anthropogenic impacts on forest growth. Dr. Cook
received his Ph.D. in Watershed Management from the University of Arizona.
William K.-M. Lau is the Deputy Director for Atmospheres, in the Earth Science
Division at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. He received his Ph.D. in Atmospheric
Sciences at the University of Washington in Seattle in 1977. Dr. Lau is an Adjunct
Professor in the Department of Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences at the University of
Maryland, Adjunct Professor of Mathematics at the Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, and Honorary Professor in the School of Climate and Energy at the City
University of Hong Kong. His research work spans more than three decades covering a
wide range of topics in climate dynamics, tropical and monsoon meteorology, oceanatmosphere interaction, aerosol-water cycle interaction, climate variability, and climate
change. He has received many awards for his research and scientific leadership,
including, among others, the American Meteorological Society Meisinger Award for
Young Scientists (1988), the NASA John Lindsay Award (1987), the Goddard
Exceptional Achievement Medal (1991), and the William Nordberg Award in Earth
Science (1999). He is a Goddard Senior Fellow, a fellow of the American Meteorological
Society, and a fellow of the American Geophysical Union.
Marc Levy is Deputy Director of the Center for International Earth Science Information
Network, a unit of Columbia University’s Earth Institute. He is also an Adjunct Professor
in Columbia’s School of International and Public Affairs. He is a political scientist
specializing in the human dimensions of global environmental change. His research
focuses on climate-security linkages, emerging infectious disease modeling,
anthropogenic drivers of global change, sustainability indicators, and vulnerability
mapping. He is also leading a project in Haiti to reduce vulnerability to disaster risks by
integrating ecology and economic development goals on a watershed scale. He has served
on a number of international assessments, and is currently a Lead Author on the
Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change Fifth Assessment chapter on Human
Security.
Elizabeth L. Malone is a Senior Research Scientist at the Joint Global Change Research
Institute. Her interests focus on policy-relevant sociological research in global change
issues, developing studies that integrate disparate worldviews, data sources, and scientific
approaches. Dr. Malone was an author and review editor for the most recent assessment
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, both in impacts, adaptation and
vulnerability; and mitigation. In recent years she has, with colleagues, developed
structured methods for analyzing country, sector, and local vulnerabilities to climate
change. Dr. Malone coordinated and developed the science portion of the National
Intelligence Assessment on Climate Change and coordinated the development of regional
reports on scientific knowledge about climate change. She was the technical lead for a
report on glacier melt in the greater Himalayan area, including downstream
vulnerabilities and potential interventions for the U.S. Agency for International
Development. She received her Ph.D. in Sociology from the University of Maryland in
2004.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

Appendix G

205

Robert McDonald is a Vanguard Scientist for The Nature Conservancy. Dr. McDonald
works for the Conservancy’s Analysis Unit, working on issues related to energy,
agriculture, and ecosystem services. Dr. McDonald has recently led a National Center for
Ecological Analysis and Synthesis Working Group on how global urban growth and
climate change will affect urban water availability and air quality. He also researches the
effect of U.S. energy policy on natural habitat and water use. Prior to joining the
Conservancy, he was a Smith Conservation Biology Fellow at Harvard University,
studying the impact global urban growth will have on biodiversity and conservation. Dr.
McDonald has also taught landscape ecology at Harvard’s Graduate School of Design,
helping architects and planners incorporate ecological principles into their projects. He
earned his Ph.D. in Ecology from Duke University.
Drew Shindell is a Senior Scientist at the NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies. Dr.
Shindell researches climate change, with a focus on atmospheric chemistry. An expert on
modeling the impact of emissions changes, Dr. Shindell’s work has investigated how the
atmospheric chemical system has important effects on humans through pollutants such as
smog or particulates, through acid rain, and through stratospheric ozone change, and how
climate can be altered by greenhouse gases, solar variability, volcanic eruptions, aerosols,
and ozone, and what effects changes in climate and air quality may have on society. Dr.
Shindell serves as a coordinating lead author for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change’s Fifth Assessment Report on global climate change. He earned his Ph.D. at
Stony Brook University.
Lonnie G. Thompson (NAS) is a Professor at The Ohio State University’s School of
Earth Sciences and Senior Research Scientist at the Byrd Polar Research Center. His
research focuses on searching glacial ice for clues to global warming, and he uses new
technologies in the emerging science of paleoclimatology. Dr. Thompson made his first
expedition to glaciers in December 1973 to Antarctica and he has been on more than 50
glaciological research expeditions since then. Dr. Thompson pioneered studies of
Quaternary climate change recorded in low-latitude alpine icecaps. His work on ice cores
led to a fundamental shift in thinking about the importance of the tropics in global
climate change. He was elected to the advisory board of the International Glaciological
Society in 1999. Dr. Thompson was elected a fellow of the American Geophysical Union
in 2001, was named a 2002 Distinguished University Professor from The Ohio State
University, and elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 2005. He received the
National Medal of Science in 2007.
James L. Wescoat Jr. is an Aga Khan Professor at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. His research concentrates on water systems in South Asia and the United
States from the site to river basin scales. e has served on the Water Science and
Technology Board, including Committees for the Review of Lake Ontario-St. Lawrence
Studies; Downstream: Adaptive Management of Glen Canyon Dam and the Colorado
River; and A New Era for Irrigation. He has contributed to studies of climate, water, and
food security in the Indus basin; and to historical research on waterworks of the Mughal
period in India and Pakistan. In 2003, he co-authored Water for Life: Water Management

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Himalayan Glaciers: Climate Change, Water Resources, and Water Security

206

Appendix G

and Environmental Policy with geographer Gilbert F. White. Dr. Wescoat received his
Ph.D. in Geography from The University of Chicago.
Mark W. Williams is a Professor of Geography and Fellow of the Institute of Arctic and
Alpine Research at the University of Colorado, Boulder. Dr. Williams’ research interest
is the processes that determine the hydrology, hydrochemistry and biogeochemistry of
high-elevation basins including the storage and release of solutes from the snowpack,
biogeochemical modifications of snowpack runoff, nutrient cycling, surface/groundwater
interactions, and hydrologic pathways and residence time. Current projects include the
Rocky Mountains, Andes, European Alps, Central Asian areas of Kazakhstan and
Kirghizia, western China including Tibet, and the Himalayas. Dr. Williams was elected a
Fellow of the American Geophysical Union in 2012 and is a former Fulbright Research
Scholar. He received his Ph.D. in Biological Sciences with an emphasis in ecology and
hydrology from the University of California, Santa Barbara in 1991.

PREPUBLICATION COPY
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

