This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs. The Climate

Thank you for downloading this Simon & Schuster eBook.
Join our mailing list and get updates on new releases, deals, bonus content and other great books from Simon
& Schuster.

CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP

or visit us online to sign up at
eBookNews.SimonandSchuster.com

CONTENTS
Epigraph
Introduction One Way or Another, Everything Changes

PART ONE

BAD TIMING
1. The Right Is Right: The Revolutionary Power of Climate Change
2. Hot Money: How Free Market Fundamentalism Helped Overheat the Planet
3. Public and Paid For: Overcoming the Ideological Blocks to the Next Economy
4. Planning and Banning: Slapping the Invisible Hand, Building a Movement
5. Beyond Extractivism: Confronting the Climate Denier Within

PART TWO

MAGICAL THINKING
6. Fruits, Not Roots: The Disastrous Merger of Big Business and Big Green
7. No Messiahs: The Green Billionaires Won’t Save Us
8. Dimming the Sun: The Solution to Pollution Is . . . Pollution?

PART THREE

STARTING ANYWAY

9. Blockadia: The New Climate Warriors
10. Love Will Save This Place: Democracy, Divestment, and the Wins So Far
11. You and What Army? Indigenous Rights and the Power of Keeping Our Word
12. Sharing the Sky: The Atmospheric Commons and the Power of Paying Our Debts
13. The Right to Regenerate: Moving from Extraction to Renewal
Conclusion The Leap Years: Just Enough Time for Impossible
Acknowledgments
About Naomi Klein
Notes
Index

For Toma

“We need to remember that the work of our time is bigger than climate change. We need to
be setting our sights higher and deeper. What we’re really talking about, if we’re honest
with ourselves, is transforming everything about the way we live on this planet.”
—Rebecca Tarbotton, Executive Director of the Rainforest Action Network, 1973–20121

“In my books I’ve imagined people salting the Gulf Stream, damming the glaciers sliding off
the Greenland ice cap, pumping ocean water into the dry basins of the Sahara and Asia to
create salt seas, pumping melted ice from Antarctica north to provide freshwater,
genetically engineering bacteria to sequester more carbon in the roots of trees, raising
Florida 30 feet to get it back above water, and (hardest of all) comprehensively changing
capitalism.”
—Science fiction writer Kim Stanley Robinson, 20122

Introduction

ONE WAY OR ANOTHER, EVERYTHING CHANGES
“Most projections of climate change presume that future changes—greenhouse gas
emissions, temperature increases and effects such as sea level rise—will happen
incrementally. A given amount of emission will lead to a given amount of temperature
increase that will lead to a given amount of smooth incremental sea level rise. However, the
geological record for the climate reflects instances where a relatively small change in one
element of climate led to abrupt changes in the system as a whole. In other words, pushing
global temperatures past certain thresholds could trigger abrupt, unpredictable and
potentially irreversible changes that have massively disruptive and large-scale impacts. At
that point, even if we do not add any additional CO2 to the atmosphere, potentially
unstoppable processes are set in motion. We can think of this as sudden climate brake and
steering failure where the problem and its consequences are no longer something we can
control.”
—Report by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the world’s largest general scientific society, 20141

“I love that smell of the emissions.”
—Sarah Palin, 20112

A voice came over the intercom: would the passengers of Flight 3935, scheduled
to depart Washington, D.C., for Charleston, South Carolina, kindly collect
their carry-on luggage and get off the plane.
They went down the stairs and gathered on the hot tarmac. There they saw
something unusual: the wheels of the US Airways jet had sunk into the black
pavement as if it were wet cement. The wheels were lodged so deep, in fact, that
the truck that came to tow the plane away couldn’t pry it loose. The airline had
hoped that without the added weight of the flight’s thirty-five passengers, the
aircraft would be light enough to pull. It wasn’t. Someone posted a picture:

“Why is my flight cancelled? Because DC is so damn hot that our plane sank 4"
into the pavement.”3
Eventually, a larger, more powerful vehicle was brought in to tow the plane
and this time it worked; the plane finally took off, three hours behind schedule.
A spokesperson for the airline blamed the incident on “very unusual
temperatures.”4
The temperatures in the summer of 2012 were indeed unusually hot. (As
they were the year before and the year after.) And it’s no mystery why this has
been happening: the profligate burning of fossil fuels, the very thing that US
Airways was bound and determined to do despite the inconvenience presented
by a melting tarmac. This irony—the fact that the burning of fossil fuels is so
radically changing our climate that it is getting in the way of our capacity to
burn fossil fuels—did not stop the passengers of Flight 3935 from reembarking
and continuing their journeys. Nor was climate change mentioned in any of the
major news coverage of the incident.
I am in no position to judge these passengers. All of us who live high
consumer lifestyles, wherever we happen to reside, are, metaphorically,
passengers on Flight 3935. Faced with a crisis that threatens our survival as a
species, our entire culture is continuing to do the very thing that caused the
crisis, only with an extra dose of elbow grease behind it. Like the airline
bringing in a truck with a more powerful engine to tow that plane, the global
economy is upping the ante from conventional sources of fossil fuels to even
dirtier and more dangerous versions—bitumen from the Alberta tar sands, oil
from deepwater drilling, gas from hydraulic fracturing (fracking), coal from
detonated mountains, and so on.
Meanwhile, each supercharged natural disaster produces new irony-laden
snapshots of a climate increasingly inhospitable to the very industries most
responsible for its warming. Like the 2013 historic floods in Calgary that forced
the head offices of the oil companies mining the Alberta tar sands to go dark
and send their employees home, while a train carrying flammable petroleum
products teetered on the edge of a disintegrating rail bridge. Or the drought that
hit the Mississippi River one year earlier, pushing water levels so low that barges
loaded with oil and coal were unable to move for days, while they waited for the
Army Corps of Engineers to dredge a channel (they had to appropriate funds
allocated to rebuild from the previous year’s historic flooding along the same
waterway). Or the coal-fired power plants in other parts of the country that

were temporarily shut down because the waterways that they draw on to cool
their machinery were either too hot or too dry (or, in some cases, both).
Living with this kind of cognitive dissonance is simply part of being alive in
this jarring moment in history, when a crisis we have been studiously ignoring is
hitting us in the face—and yet we are doubling down on the stuff that is causing
the crisis in the first place.
I denied climate change for longer than I care to admit. I knew it was
happening, sure. Not like Donald Trump and the Tea Partiers going on about
how the continued existence of winter proves it’s all a hoax. But I stayed pretty
hazy on the details and only skimmed most of the news stories, especially the
really scary ones. I told myself the science was too complicated and that the
environmentalists were dealing with it. And I continued to behave as if there
was nothing wrong with the shiny card in my wallet attesting to my “elite”
frequent flyer status.
A great many of us engage in this kind of climate change denial. We look for
a split second and then we look away. Or we look but then turn it into a joke
(“more signs of the Apocalypse!”). Which is another way of looking away.
Or we look but tell ourselves comforting stories about how humans are clever
and will come up with a technological miracle that will safely suck the carbon
out of the skies or magically turn down the heat of the sun. Which, I was to
discover while researching this book, is yet another way of looking away.
Or we look but try to be hyper-rational about it (“dollar for dollar it’s more
efficient to focus on economic development than climate change, since wealth
is the best protection from weather extremes”)—as if having a few more dollars
will make much difference when your city is underwater. Which is a way of
looking away if you happen to be a policy wonk.
Or we look but tell ourselves we are too busy to care about something so
distant and abstract—even though we saw the water in the subways in New
York City, and the people on their rooftops in New Orleans, and know that no
one is safe, the most vulnerable least of all. And though perfectly
understandable, this too is a way of looking away.
Or we look but tell ourselves that all we can do is focus on ourselves.
Meditate and shop at farmers’ markets and stop driving—but forget trying to
actually change the systems that are making the crisis inevitable because that’s
too much “bad energy” and it will never work. And at first it may appear as if we
are looking, because many of these lifestyle changes are indeed part of the
solution, but we still have one eye tightly shut.

Or maybe we do look—really look—but then, inevitably, we seem to forget.
Remember and then forget again. Climate change is like that; it’s hard to keep
it in your head for very long. We engage in this odd form of on-again-off-again
ecological amnesia for perfectly rational reasons. We deny because we fear that
letting in the full reality of this crisis will change everything. And we are right.5
We know that if we continue on our current path of allowing emissions to
rise year after year, climate change will change everything about our world.
Major cities will very likely drown, ancient cultures will be swallowed by the
seas, and there is a very high chance that our children will spend a great deal of
their lives fleeing and recovering from vicious storms and extreme droughts.
And we don’t have to do anything to bring about this future. All we have to do
is nothing. Just continue to do what we are doing now, whether it’s counting on
a techno-fix or tending to our gardens or telling ourselves we’re unfortunately
too busy to deal with it.
All we have to do is not react as if this is a full-blown crisis. All we have to do
is keep on denying how frightened we actually are. And then, bit by bit, we will
have arrived at the place we most fear, the thing from which we have been
averting our eyes. No additional effort required.
There are ways of preventing this grim future, or at least making it a lot less
dire. But the catch is that these also involve changing everything. For us high
consumers, it involves changing how we live, how our economies function, even
the stories we tell about our place on earth. The good news is that many of these
changes are distinctly un-catastrophic. Many are downright exciting. But I
didn’t discover this for a long while.
I remember the precise moment when I stopped averting my eyes to the
reality of climate change, or at least when I first allowed my eyes to rest there for
a good while. It was in Geneva, in April 2009, and I was meeting with Bolivia’s
ambassador to the World Trade Organization (WTO), who was then a
surprisingly young woman named Angélica Navarro Llanos. Bolivia being a poor
country with a small international budget, Navarro Llanos had recently taken
on the climate portfolio in addition to her trade responsibilities. Over lunch in
an empty Chinese restaurant, she explained to me (using chopsticks as props to
make a graph of the global emission trajectory) that she saw climate change
both as a terrible threat to her people—but also an opportunity.
A threat for the obvious reasons: Bolivia is extraordinarily dependent on
glaciers for its drinking and irrigation water and those white-capped mountains
that tower over its capital were turning gray and brown at an alarming rate. The

opportunity, Navarro Llanos said, was that since countries like hers had done
almost nothing to send emissions soaring, they were in a position to declare
themselves “climate creditors,” owed money and technology support from the
large emitters to defray the hefty costs of coping with more climate-related
disasters, as well as to help them develop on a green energy path.
She had recently given a speech at a United Nations climate conference in
which she laid out the case for these kinds of wealth transfers, and she gave me a
copy. “Millions of people,” it read, “in small islands, least-developed countries,
landlocked countries as well as vulnerable communities in Brazil, India and
China, and all around the world—are suffering from the effects of a problem to
which they did not contribute. . . . If we are to curb emissions in the next
decade, we need a massive mobilization larger than any in history. We need a
Marshall Plan for the Earth. This plan must mobilize financing and technology
transfer on scales never seen before. It must get technology onto the ground in
every country to ensure we reduce emissions while raising people’s quality of life.
We have only a decade.”6
Of course a Marshall Plan for the Earth would be very costly—hundreds of
billions if not trillions of dollars (Navarro Llanos was reluctant to name a
figure). And one might have thought that the cost alone would make it a
nonstarter—after all, this was 2009 and the global financial crisis was in full
swing. Yet the grinding logic of austerity—passing on the bankers’ bills to the
people in the form of public sector layoffs, school closures, and the like—had
not yet been normalized. So rather than making Navarro Llanos’s ideas seem
less plausible, the crisis had the opposite effect.
We had all just watched as trillions of dollars were marshaled in a moment
when our elites decided to declare a crisis. If the banks were allowed to fail, we
were told, the rest of the economy would collapse. It was a matter of collective
survival, so the money had to be found. In the process, some rather large fictions
at the heart of our economic system were exposed (Need more money? Print
some!). A few years earlier, governments took a similar approach to public
finances after the September 11 terrorist attacks. In many Western countries,
when it came to constructing the security/surveillance state at home and waging
war abroad, budgets never seemed to be an issue.
Climate change has never received the crisis treatment from our leaders,
despite the fact that it carries the risk of destroying lives on a vastly greater scale
than collapsed banks or collapsed buildings. The cuts to our greenhouse gas
emissions that scientists tell us are necessary in order to greatly reduce the risk

of catastrophe are treated as nothing more than gentle suggestions, actions that
can be put off pretty much indefinitely. Clearly, what gets declared a crisis is an
expression of power and priorities as much as hard facts. But we need not be
spectators in all this: politicians aren’t the only ones with the power to declare a
crisis. Mass movements of regular people can declare one too.
Slavery wasn’t a crisis for British and American elites until abolitionism
turned it into one. Racial discrimination wasn’t a crisis until the civil rights
movement turned it into one. Sex discrimination wasn’t a crisis until feminism
turned it into one. Apartheid wasn’t a crisis until the anti-apartheid movement
turned it into one.
In the very same way, if enough of us stop looking away and decide that
climate change is a crisis worthy of Marshall Plan levels of response, then it will
become one, and the political class will have to respond, both by making
resources available and by bending the free market rules that have proven so
pliable when elite interests are in peril. We occasionally catch glimpses of this
potential when a crisis puts climate change at the front of our minds for a while.
“Money is no object in this relief effort. Whatever money is needed for it will be
spent,” declared British prime minister David Cameron—Mr. Austerity himself
—when large parts of his country were underwater from historic flooding in
February 2014 and the public was enraged that his government was not doing
more to help.7
Listening to Navarro Llanos describe Bolivia’s perspective, I began to
understand how climate change—if treated as a true planetary emergency akin
to those rising flood waters—could become a galvanizing force for humanity,
leaving us all not just safer from extreme weather, but with societies that are
safer and fairer in all kinds of other ways as well. The resources required to
rapidly move away from fossil fuels and prepare for the coming heavy weather
could pull huge swaths of humanity out of poverty, providing services now sorely
lacking, from clean water to electricity. This is a vision of the future that goes
beyond just surviving or enduring climate change, beyond “mitigating” and
“adapting” to it in the grim language of the United Nations. It is a vision in
which we collectively use the crisis to leap somewhere that seems, frankly,
better than where we are right now.
After that conversation, I found that I no longer feared immersing myself in
the scientific reality of the climate threat. I stopped avoiding the articles and
the scientific studies and read everything I could find. I also stopped outsourcing
the problem to the environmentalists, stopped telling myself this was somebody

else’s issue, somebody else’s job. And through conversations with others in the
growing climate justice movement, I began to see all kinds of ways that climate
change could become a catalyzing force for positive change—how it could be
the best argument progressives have ever had to demand the rebuilding and
reviving of local economies; to reclaim our democracies from corrosive
corporate influence; to block harmful new free trade deals and rewrite old ones;
to invest in starving public infrastructure like mass transit and affordable
housing; to take back ownership of essential services like energy and water; to
remake our sick agricultural system into something much healthier; to open
borders to migrants whose displacement is linked to climate impacts; to finally
respect Indigenous land rights—all of which would help to end grotesque levels
of inequality within our nations and between them.
And I started to see signs—new coalitions and fresh arguments—hinting at
how, if these various connections were more widely understood, the urgency of
the climate crisis could form the basis of a powerful mass movement, one that
would weave all these seemingly disparate issues into a coherent narrative about
how to protect humanity from the ravages of both a savagely unjust economic
system and a destabilized climate system. I have written this book because I
came to the conclusion that climate action could provide just such a rare
catalyst.

A People’s Shock
But I also wrote it because climate change can be a catalyst for a range of very
different and far less desirable forms of social, political, and economic
transformation.
I have spent the last fifteen years immersed in research about societies
undergoing extreme shocks—caused by economic meltdowns, natural disasters,
terrorist attacks, and wars. And I have looked deeply into how societies change
in these periods of tremendous stress. How these events change the collective
sense of what is possible, for better but mostly for worse. As I discussed in my
last book, The Shock Doctrine, over the past four decades corporate interests have
systematically exploited these various forms of crisis to ram through policies that
enrich a small elite—by lifting regulations, cutting social spending, and forcing
large-scale privatizations of the public sphere. They have also been the excuse
for extreme crackdowns on civil liberties and chilling human rights violations.

And there are plenty of signs that climate change will be no exception—
that, rather than sparking solutions that have a real chance of preventing
catastrophic warming and protecting us from inevitable disasters, the crisis will
once again be seized upon to hand over yet more resources to the 1 percent. You
can see the early stages of this process already. Communal forests around the
world are being turned into privatized tree farms and preserves so their owners
can collect something called “carbon credits,” a lucrative scam I’ll explore later.
There is a booming trade in “weather futures,” allowing companies and banks to
gamble on changes in the weather as if deadly disasters were a game on a Vegas
craps table (between 2005 and 2006 the weather derivatives market jumped
nearly fivefold, from $9.7 billion to $45.2 billion). Global reinsurance
companies are making billions in profits, in part by selling new kinds of
protection schemes to developing countries that have done almost nothing to
create the climate crisis, but whose infrastructure is intensely vulnerable to its
impacts.8
And in a moment of candor, the weapons giant Raytheon explained,
“Expanded business opportunities are likely to arise as consumer behaviour and
needs change in response to climate change.” Those opportunities include not
just more demand for the company’s privatized disaster response services but also
“demand for its military products and services as security concerns may arise as
results of droughts, floods, and storm events occur as a result of climate
change.”9 This is worth remembering whenever doubts creep in about the
urgency of this crisis: the private militias are already mobilizing.
Droughts and floods create all kinds of business opportunities besides a
growing demand for men with guns. Between 2008 and 2010, at least 261
patents were filed related to growing “climate-ready” crops—seeds supposedly
able to withstand extreme weather conditions; of these patents close to 80
percent were controlled by six agribusiness giants, including Monsanto and
Syngenta. Superstorm Sandy, meanwhile, has been a windfall for New Jersey
real estate developers who have received millions for new construction in lightly
damaged areas, while it continues to be a nightmare for those living in hard-hit
public housing, much as the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina played out in New
Orleans.10
None of this is surprising. Finding new ways to privatize the commons and
profit from disaster is what our current system is built to do; left to its own
devices, it is capable of nothing else. The shock doctrine, however, is not the
only way societies respond to crises. We have all witnessed this in recent years

as the financial meltdown that began on Wall Street in 2008 reverberated
around the world. A sudden rise in food prices helped create the conditions for
the Arab Spring. Austerity policies have inspired mass movements from Greece
to Spain to Chile to the United States to Quebec. Many of us are getting a lot
better at standing up to those who would cynically exploit crises to ransack the
public sphere. And yet these protests have also shown that saying no is not
enough. If opposition movements are to do more than burn bright and then
burn out, they will need a comprehensive vision for what should emerge in the
place of our failing system, as well as serious political strategies for how to
achieve those goals.
Progressives used to know how to do this. There is a rich populist history of
winning big victories for social and economic justice in the midst of large-scale
crises. These include, most notably, the policies of the New Deal after the
market crash of 1929 and the birth of countless social programs after World War
II. These policies were so popular with voters that getting them passed into law
did not require the kind of authoritarian trickery that I documented in The
Shock Doctrine. What was essential was building muscular mass movements
capable of standing up to those defending a failing status quo, and that
demanded a significantly fairer share of the economic pie for everyone. A few of
the lasting (though embattled) legacies of these exceptional historical moments
include: public health insurance in many countries, old age pensions, subsidized
housing, and public funding for the arts.
I am convinced that climate change represents a historic opportunity on an
even greater scale. As part of the project of getting our emissions down to the
levels many scientists recommend, we once again have the chance to advance
policies that dramatically improve lives, close the gap between rich and poor,
create huge numbers of good jobs, and reinvigorate democracy from the ground
up. Rather than the ultimate expression of the shock doctrine—a frenzy of new
resource grabs and repression—climate change can be a People’s Shock, a blow
from below. It can disperse power into the hands of the many rather than
consolidating it in the hands of the few, and radically expand the commons,
rather than auctioning it off in pieces. And where right-wing shock doctors
exploit emergencies (both real and manufactured) in order to push through
policies that make us even more crisis prone, the kinds of transformations
discussed in these pages would do the exact opposite: they would get to the root
of why we are facing serial crises in the first place, and would leave us with both

a more habitable climate than the one we are headed for and a far more just
economy than the one we have right now.
But before any of these changes can happen—before we can believe that
climate change can change us—we first have to stop looking away.
“You have been negotiating all my life.” So said Canadian college student
Anjali Appadurai, as she stared down the assembled government negotiators at
the 2011 United Nations climate conference in Durban, South Africa. She was
not exaggerating. The world’s governments have been talking about preventing
climate change for more than two decades; they began negotiating the year that
Anjali, then twenty-one years old, was born. And yet as she pointed out in her
memorable speech on the convention floor, delivered on behalf of all of the
assembled young people: “In that time, you’ve failed to meet pledges, you’ve
missed targets, and you’ve broken promises.”11
In truth, the intergovernmental body entrusted to prevent “dangerous” levels
of climate change has not only failed to make progress over its twenty-odd years
of work (and more than ninety official negotiation meetings since the
agreement was adopted), it has overseen a process of virtually uninterrupted
backsliding. Our governments wasted years fudging numbers and squabbling
over start dates, perpetually trying to get extensions like undergrads with late
term papers.
The catastrophic result of all this obfuscation and procrastination is now
undeniable. Preliminary data shows that in 2013, global carbon dioxide
emissions were 61 percent higher than they were in 1990, when negotiations
toward a climate treaty began in earnest. As MIT economist John Reilly puts it:
“The more we talk about the need to control emissions, the more they are
growing.” Indeed the only thing rising faster than our emissions is the output of
words pledging to lower them. Meanwhile, the annual U.N. climate summit,
which remains the best hope for a political breakthrough on climate action, has
started to seem less like a forum for serious negotiation than a very costly and
high-carbon group therapy session, a place for the representatives of the most
vulnerable countries in the world to vent their grief and rage while low-level
representatives of the nations largely responsible for their tragedies stare at their
shoes.12
This has been the mood ever since the collapse of the much-hyped 2009
U.N. climate summit in Copenhagen. On the last night of that massive

gathering, I found myself with a group of climate justice activists, including one
of the most prominent campaigners in Britain. Throughout the summit, this
young man had been the picture of confidence and composure, briefing dozens
of journalists a day on what had gone on during each round of negotiations and
what the various emission targets meant in the real world. Despite the
challenges, his optimism about the summit’s prospects never flagged. Once it
was all over, however, and the pitiful deal was done, he fell apart before our
eyes. Sitting in an overlit Italian restaurant, he began to sob uncontrollably. “I
really thought Obama understood,” he kept repeating.
I have come to think of that night as the climate movement’s coming of age:
it was the moment when the realization truly sank in that no one was coming to
save us. The British psychoanalyst and climate specialist Sally Weintrobe
describes this as the summit’s “fundamental legacy”—the acute and painful
realization that our “leaders are not looking after us . . . we are not cared for at
the level of our very survival.”13 No matter how many times we have been
disappointed by the failings of our politicians, this realization still comes as a
blow. It really is the case that we are on our own and any credible source of
hope in this crisis will have to come from below.
In Copenhagen, the major polluting governments—including the United
States and China—signed a nonbinding agreement pledging to keep
temperatures from increasing more than 2 degrees Celsius above where they
were before we started powering our economies with coal. (That converts to an
increase of 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit.) This well-known target, which supposedly
represents the “safe” limit of climate change, has always been a highly political
choice that has more to do with minimizing economic disruption than with
protecting the greatest number of people. When the 2 degrees target was made
official in Copenhagen, there were impassioned objections from many delegates
who said the goal amounted to a “death sentence” for some lowlying island
states, as well as for large parts of Sub-Saharan Africa. In fact it is a very risky
target for all of us: so far, temperatures have increased by just .8 degree Celsius
and we are already experiencing many alarming impacts, including the
unprecedented melting of the Greenland ice sheet in the summer of 2012 and
the acidification of oceans far more rapidly than expected. Allowing
temperatures to warm by more than twice that amount will unquestionably have
perilous consequences.14
In a 2012 report, the World Bank laid out the gamble implied by that target.
“As global warming approaches and exceeds 2-degrees Celsius, there is a risk of

triggering nonlinear tipping elements. Examples include the disintegration of
the West Antarctic ice sheet leading to more rapid sea-level rise, or large-scale
Amazon dieback drastically affecting ecosystems, rivers, agriculture, energy
production, and livelihoods. This would further add to 21st-century global
warming and impact entire continents.”15 In other words, once we allow
temperatures to climb past a certain point, where the mercury stops is not in our
control.
But the bigger problem—and the reason Copenhagen caused such great
despair—is that because governments did not agree to binding targets, they are
free to pretty much ignore their commitments. Which is precisely what is
happening. Indeed, emissions are rising so rapidly that unless something radical
changes within our economic structure, 2 degrees now looks like a utopian
dream. And it’s not just environmentalists who are raising the alarm. The
World Bank also warned when it released its report that “we’re on track for a
4°C warmer world [by century’s end] marked by extreme heat waves, declining
global food stocks, loss of ecosystems and biodiversity, and life-threatening sea
level rise.” And the report cautioned that, “there is also no certainty that
adaptation to a 4°C world is possible.” Kevin Anderson, former director (now
deputy director) of the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research, which has
quickly established itself as one of the U.K.’s premier climate research
institutions, is even blunter; he says 4 degrees Celsius warming—7.2 degrees
Fahrenheit—is “incompatible with any reasonable characterization of an
organized, equitable and civilized global community.”16
We don’t know exactly what a 4 degrees Celsius world would look like, but
even the best-case scenario is likely to be calamitous. Four degrees of warming
could raise global sea levels by 1 or possibly even 2 meters by 2100 (and would
lock in at least a few additional meters over future centuries). This would drown
some island nations such as the Maldives and Tuvalu, and inundate many
coastal areas from Ecuador and Brazil to the Netherlands to much of California
and the northeastern United States, as well as huge swaths of South and
Southeast Asia. Major cities likely in jeopardy include Boston, New York,
greater Los Angeles, Vancouver, London, Mumbai, Hong Kong, and
Shanghai.17
Meanwhile, brutal heat waves that can kill tens of thousands of people, even
in wealthy countries, would become entirely unremarkable summer events on
every continent but Antarctica. The heat would also cause staple crops to suffer
dramatic yield losses across the globe (it is possible that Indian wheat and U.S.

corn could plummet by as much as 60 percent), this at a time when demand will
be surging due to population growth and a growing demand for meat. And since
crops will be facing not just heat stress but also extreme events such as wideranging droughts, flooding, or pest outbreaks, the losses could easily turn out to
be more severe than the models have predicted. When you add ruinous
hurricanes, raging wildfires, fisheries collapses, widespread disruptions to water
supplies, extinctions, and globe-trotting diseases to the mix, it indeed becomes
difficult to imagine that a peaceful, ordered society could be sustained (that is,
where such a thing exists in the first place).18
And keep in mind that these are the optimistic scenarios in which warming
is more or less stabilized at 4 degrees Celsius and does not trigger tipping points
beyond which runaway warming would occur. Based on the latest modeling, it is
becoming safer to assume that 4 degrees could bring about a number of
extremely dangerous feedback loops—an Arctic that is regularly ice-free in
September, for instance, or, according to one recent study, global vegetation
that is too saturated to act as a reliable “sink,” leading to more carbon being
emitted rather than stored. Once this happens, any hope of predicting impacts
pretty much goes out the window. And this process may be starting sooner than
anyone predicted. In May 2014, NASA and University of California, Irvine
scientists revealed that glacier melt in a section of West Antarctica roughly the
size of France now “appears unstoppable.” This likely spells doom for the entire
West Antarctic ice sheet, which according to lead study author Eric Rignot
“comes with a sea level rise of between three and five metres. Such an event will
displace millions of people worldwide.” The disintegration, however, could
unfold over centuries and there is still time for emission reductions to slow down
the process and prevent the worst.19
Much more frightening than any of this is the fact that plenty of mainstream
analysts think that on our current emissions trajectory, we are headed for even
more than 4 degrees of warming. In 2011, the usually staid International Energy
Agency (IEA) issued a report projecting that we are actually on track for 6
degrees Celsius—10.8 degrees Fahrenheit—of warming. And as the IEA’s chief
economist put it: “Everybody, even the school children, knows that this will
have catastrophic implications for all of us.” (The evidence indicates that 6
degrees of warming is likely to set in motion several major tipping points—not
only slower ones such as the aforementioned breakdown of the West Antarctic
ice sheet, but possibly more abrupt ones, like massive releases of methane from
Arctic permafrost.) The accounting giant PricewaterhouseCoopers has also

published a report warning businesses that we are headed for “4°C, or even 6°C”
of warming.20
These various projections are the equivalent of every alarm in your house
going off simultaneously. And then every alarm on your street going off as well,
one by one by one. They mean, quite simply, that climate change has become
an existential crisis for the human species. The only historical precedent for a
crisis of this depth and scale was the Cold War fear that we were heading toward
nuclear holocaust, which would have made much of the planet uninhabitable.
But that was (and remains) a threat; a slim possibility, should geopolitics spiral
out of control. The vast majority of nuclear scientists never told us that we were
almost certainly going to put our civilization in peril if we kept going about our
daily lives as usual, doing exactly what we were already doing, which is what the
climate scientists have been telling us for years.
As the Ohio State University climatologist Lonnie G. Thompson, a worldrenowned specialist on glacier melt, explained in 2010, “Climatologists, like
other scientists, tend to be a stolid group. We are not given to theatrical
rantings about falling skies. Most of us are far more comfortable in our
laboratories or gathering data in the field than we are giving interviews to
journalists or speaking before Congressional committees. Why then are
climatologists speaking out about the dangers of global warming? The answer is
that virtually all of us are now convinced that global warming poses a clear and
present danger to civilization.”21
It doesn’t get much clearer than that. And yet rather than responding with
alarm and doing everything in our power to change course, large parts of
humanity are, quite consciously, continuing down the same road. Only, like the
passengers aboard Flight 3935, aided by a more powerful, dirtier engine.
What is wrong with us?

Really Bad Timing
Many answers to that question have been offered, ranging from the extreme
difficulty of getting all the governments in the world to agree on anything, to an
absence of real technological solutions, to something deep in our human nature
that keeps us from acting in the face of seemingly remote threats, to—more
recently—the claim that we have blown it anyway and there is no point in even
trying to do much more than enjoy the scenery on the way down.

Some of these explanations are valid, but all are ultimately inadequate. Take
the claim that it’s just too hard for so many countries to agree on a course of
action. It is hard. But many times in the past, the United Nations has helped
governments to come together to tackle tough cross-border challenges, from
ozone depletion to nuclear proliferation. The deals produced weren’t perfect,
but they represented real progress. Moreover, during the same years that our
governments failed to enact a tough and binding legal architecture requiring
emission reductions, supposedly because cooperation was too complex, they
managed to create the World Trade Organization—an intricate global system
that regulates the flow of goods and services around the planet, under which the
rules are clear and violations are harshly penalized.
The assertion that we have been held back by a lack of technological
solutions is no more compelling. Power from renewable sources like wind and
water predates the use of fossil fuels and is becoming cheaper, more efficient,
and easier to store every year. The past two decades have seen an explosion of
ingenious zero-waste design, as well as green urban planning. Not only do we
have the technical tools to get off fossil fuels, we also have no end of small
pockets where these low carbon lifestyles have been tested with tremendous
success. And yet the kind of large-scale transition that would give us a collective
chance of averting catastrophe eludes us.
Is it just human nature that holds us back then? In fact we humans have
shown ourselves willing to collectively sacrifice in the face of threats many
times, most famously in the embrace of rationing, victory gardens, and victory
bonds during World Wars I and II. Indeed to support fuel conservation during
World War II, pleasure driving was virtually eliminated in the U.K., and
between 1938 and 1944, use of public transit went up by 87 percent in the U.S.
and by 95 percent in Canada. Twenty million U.S. households—representing
three fifths of the population—were growing victory gardens in 1943, and their
yields accounted for 42 percent of the fresh vegetables consumed that year.
Interestingly, all of these activities together dramatically reduce carbon
emissions.22
Yes, the threat of war seemed immediate and concrete but so too is the threat
posed by the climate crisis that has already likely been a substantial contributor
to massive disasters in some of the world’s major cities. Still, we’ve gone soft
since those days of wartime sacrifice, haven’t we? Contemporary humans are too
self-centered, too addicted to gratification to live without the full freedom to
satisfy our every whim—or so our culture tells us every day. And yet the truth is

that we continue to make collective sacrifices in the name of an abstract greater
good all the time. We sacrifice our pensions, our hard-won labor rights, our arts
and after-school programs. We send our kids to learn in ever more crowded
classrooms, led by ever more harried teachers. We accept that we have to pay
dramatically more for the destructive energy sources that power our
transportation and our lives. We accept that bus and subway fares go up and up
while service fails to improve or degenerates. We accept that a public university
education should result in a debt that will take half a lifetime to pay off when
such a thing was unheard of a generation ago. In Canada, where I live, we are in
the midst of accepting that our mail can no longer be delivered to our homes.
The past thirty years have been a steady process of getting less and less in the
public sphere. This is all defended in the name of austerity, the current
justification for these never-ending demands for collective sacrifice. In the past,
other words and phrases, equally abstracted from daily life, have served a similar
purpose: balanced budgets, increased efficiency, fostering economic growth.
It seems to me that if humans are capable of sacrificing this much collective
benefit in the name of stabilizing an economic system that makes daily life so
much more expensive and precarious, then surely humans should be capable of
making some important lifestyle changes in the interest of stabilizing the
physical systems upon which all of life depends. Especially because many of the
changes that need to be made to dramatically cut emissions would also
materially improve the quality of life for the majority of people on the planet—
from allowing kids in Beijing to play outside without wearing pollution masks to
creating good jobs in clean energy sectors for millions. There seems to be no
shortage of both short-term and medium-term incentives to do the right thing
for our climate.
Time is tight, to be sure. But we could commit ourselves, tomorrow, to
radically cutting our fossil fuel emissions and beginning the shift to zero-carbon
sources of energy based on renewable technology, with a full-blown transition
underway within the decade. We have the tools to do that. And if we did, the
seas would still rise and the storms would still come, but we would stand a much
greater chance of preventing truly catastrophic warming. Indeed, entire nations
could be saved from the waves. As Pablo Solón, Bolivia’s former ambassador to
the United Nations, puts it: “If I burned your house the least I can do is
welcome you into my house . . . and if I’m burning it right now I should try to
stop the fire now.”23

But we are not stopping the fire. In fact we are dousing it with gasoline. After
a rare decline in 2009 due to the financial crisis, global emissions surged by a
whopping 5.9 percent in 2010—the largest absolute increase since the Industrial
Revolution.24
So my mind keeps coming back to the question: what is wrong with us? What
is really preventing us from putting out the fire that is threatening to burn down
our collective house?
I think the answer is far more simple than many have led us to believe: we
have not done the things that are necessary to lower emissions because those
things fundamentally conflict with deregulated capitalism, the reigning ideology
for the entire period we have been struggling to find a way out of this crisis. We
are stuck because the actions that would give us the best chance of averting
catastrophe—and would benefit the vast majority—are extremely threatening
to an elite minority that has a stranglehold over our economy, our political
process, and most of our major media outlets. That problem might not have
been insurmountable had it presented itself at another point in our history. But
it is our great collective misfortune that the scientific community made its
decisive diagnosis of the climate threat at the precise moment when those elites
were enjoying more unfettered political, cultural, and intellectual power than at
any point since the 1920s. Indeed, governments and scientists began talking
seriously about radical cuts to greenhouse gas emissions in 1988—the exact year
that marked the dawning of what came to be called “globalization,” with the
signing of the agreement representing the world’s largest bilateral trade
relationship between Canada and the United States, later to be expanded into
the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) with the inclusion of
Mexico.25
When historians look back on the past quarter century of international
negotiations, two defining processes will stand out. There will be the climate
process: struggling, sputtering, failing utterly to achieve its goals. And there will
be the corporate globalization process, zooming from victory to victory: from
that first free trade deal to the creation of the World Trade Organization to the
mass privatization of the former Soviet economies to the transformation of large
parts of Asia into sprawling free-trade zones to the “structural adjusting” of
Africa. There were setbacks to that process, to be sure—for example, popular
pushback that stalled trade rounds and free trade deals. But what remained
successful were the ideological underpinnings of the entire project, which was
never really about trading goods across borders—selling French wine in Brazil,

for instance, or U.S. software in China. It was always about using these sweeping
deals, as well as a range of other tools, to lock in a global policy framework that
provided maximum freedom to multinational corporations to produce their
goods as cheaply as possible and sell them with as few regulations as possible—
while paying as little in taxes as possible. Granting this corporate wishlist, we
were told, would fuel economic growth, which would trickle down to the rest of
us, eventually. The trade deals mattered only in so far as they stood in for, and
plainly articulated, this far broader agenda.
The three policy pillars of this new era are familiar to us all: privatization of
the public sphere, deregulation of the corporate sector, and lower corporate
taxation, paid for with cuts to public spending. Much has been written about
the real-world costs of these policies—the instability of financial markets, the
excesses of the super-rich, and the desperation of the increasingly disposable
poor, as well as the failing state of public infrastructure and services. Very little,
however, has been written about how market fundamentalism has, from the very
first moments, systematically sabotaged our collective response to climate
change, a threat that came knocking just as this ideology was reaching its
zenith.
The core problem was that the stranglehold that market logic secured over
public life in this period made the most direct and obvious climate responses
seem politically heretical. How, for instance, could societies invest massively in
zero-carbon public services and infrastructure at a time when the public sphere
was being systematically dismantled and auctioned off? How could governments
heavily regulate, tax, and penalize fossil fuel companies when all such measures
were being dismissed as relics of “command and control” communism? And how
could the renewable energy sector receive the supports and protections it
needed to replace fossil fuels when “protectionism” had been made a dirty word?
A different kind of climate movement would have tried to challenge the
extreme ideology that was blocking so much sensible action, joining with other
sectors to show how unfettered corporate power posed a grave threat to the
habitability of the planet. Instead, large parts of the climate movement wasted
precious decades attempting to make the square peg of the climate crisis fit into
the round hole of deregulated capitalism, forever touting ways for the problem
to be solved by the market itself. (Though it was only years into this project that
I discovered the depths of collusion between big polluters and Big Green.)
But blocking strong climate action wasn’t the only way that the triumph of
market fundamentalism acted to deepen the crisis in this period. Even more

directly, the policies that so successfully freed multinational corporations from
virtually all constraints also contributed significantly to the underlying cause of
global warming—rising greenhouse gas emissions. The numbers are striking: in
the 1990s, as the market integration project ramped up, global emissions were
going up an average of 1 percent a year; by the 2000s, with “emerging markets”
like China now fully integrated into the world economy, emissions growth had
sped up disastrously, with the annual rate of increase reaching 3.4 percent a year
for much of the decade. That rapid growth rate continues to this day,
interrupted only briefly in 2009 by the world financial crisis.26
With hindsight, it’s hard to see how it could have turned out otherwise. The
twin signatures of this era have been the mass export of products across vast
distances (relentlessly burning carbon all the way), and the import of a uniquely
wasteful model of production, consumption, and agriculture to every corner of
the world (also based on the profligate burning of fossil fuels). Put differently,
the liberation of world markets, a process powered by the liberation of
unprecedented amounts of fossil fuels from the earth, has dramatically sped up
the same process that is liberating Arctic ice from existence.
As a result, we now find ourselves in a very difficult and slighty ironic
position. Because of those decades of hardcore emitting exactly when we were
supposed to be cutting back, the things we must do to avoid catastrophic
warming are no longer just in conflict with the particular strain of deregulated
capitalism that triumphed in the 1980s. They are now in conflict with the
fundamental imperative at the heart of our economic model: grow or die.
Once carbon has been emitted into the atmosphere, it sticks around for
hundreds of years, some of it even longer, trapping heat. The effects are
cumulative, growing more severe with time. And according to emissions
specialists like the Tyndall Centre’s Kevin Anderson (as well as others), so
much carbon has been allowed to accumulate in the atmosphere over the past
two decades that now our only hope of keeping warming below the
internationally agreed-upon target of 2 degrees Celsius is for wealthy countries
to cut their emissions by somewhere in the neighborhood of 8–10 percent a
year.27 The “free” market simply cannot accomplish this task. Indeed, this level
of emission reduction has happened only in the context of economic collapse or
deep depressions.
I’ll be delving deeper into those numbers in Chapter 2, but the bottom line is
what matters here: our economic system and our planetary system are now at
war. Or, more accurately, our economy is at war with many forms of life on

earth, including human life. What the climate needs to avoid collapse is a
contraction in humanity’s use of resources; what our economic model demands
to avoid collapse is unfettered expansion. Only one of these sets of rules can be
changed, and it’s not the laws of nature.
Fortunately, it is eminently possible to transform our economy so that it is
less resource-intensive, and to do it in ways that are equitable, with the most
vulnerable protected and the most responsible bearing the bulk of the burden.
Low-carbon sectors of our economies can be encouraged to expand and create
jobs, while high-carbon sectors are encouraged to contract. The problem,
however, is that this scale of economic planning and management is entirely
outside the boundaries of our reigning ideology. The only kind of contraction
our current system can manage is a brutal crash, in which the most vulnerable
will suffer most of all.
So we are left with a stark choice: allow climate disruption to change
everything about our world, or change pretty much everything about our
economy to avoid that fate. But we need to be very clear: because of our decades
of collective denial, no gradual, incremental options are now available to us.
Gentle tweaks to the status quo stopped being a climate option when we
supersized the American Dream in the 1990s, and then proceeded to take it
global. And it’s no longer just radicals who see the need for radical change. In
2012, twenty-one past winners of the prestigious Blue Planet Prize—a group
that includes James Hansen, former director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for
Space Studies, and Gro Harlem Brundtland, former prime minister of Norway—
authored a landmark report. It stated that, “In the face of an absolutely
unprecedented emergency, society has no choice but to take dramatic action to
avert a collapse of civilization. Either we will change our ways and build an
entirely new kind of global society, or they will be changed for us.”28
That’s tough for a lot of people in important positions to accept, since it
challenges something that might be even more powerful than capitalism, and
that is the fetish of centrism—of reasonableness, seriousness, splitting the
difference, and generally not getting overly excited about anything. This is the
habit of thought that truly rules our era, far more among the liberals who
concern themselves with matters of climate policy than among conservatives,
many of whom simply deny the existence of the crisis. Climate change presents
a profound challenge to this cautious centrism because half measures won’t cut
it: “all of the above energy” programs, as U.S. President Barack Obama describes
his approach, has about as much chance of success as an all of the above diet,

and the firm deadlines imposed by science require that we get very worked up
indeed.
By posing climate change as a battle between capitalism and the planet, I am
not saying anything that we don’t already know. The battle is already under
way, but right now capitalism is winning hands down. It wins every time the
need for economic growth is used as the excuse for putting off climate action yet
again, or for breaking emission reduction commitments already made. It wins
when Greeks are told that their only path out of economic crisis is to open up
their beautiful seas to high-risk oil and gas drilling. It wins when Canadians are
told our only hope of not ending up like Greece is to allow our boreal forests to
be flayed so we can access the semisolid bitumen from the Alberta tar sands. It
wins when a park in Istanbul is slotted for demolition to make way for yet
another shopping mall. It wins when parents in Beijing are told that sending
their wheezing kids to school in pollution masks decorated to look like cute
cartoon characters is an acceptable price for economic progress. It wins every
time we accept that we have only bad choices available to us: austerity or
extraction, poisoning or poverty.
The challenge, then, is not simply that we need to spend a lot of money and
change a lot of policies; it’s that we need to think differently, radically
differently, for those changes to be remotely possible. Right now, the triumph of
market logic, with its ethos of domination and fierce competition, is paralyzing
almost all serious efforts to respond to climate change. Cutthroat competition
between nations has deadlocked U.N. climate negotiations for decades: rich
countries dig in their heels and declare that they won’t cut emissions and risk
losing their vaulted position in the global hierarchy; poorer countries declare
that they won’t give up their right to pollute as much as rich countries did on
their way to wealth, even if that means deepening a disaster that hurts the poor
most of all. For any of this to change, a worldview will need to rise to the fore
that sees nature, other nations, and our own neighbors not as adversaries, but
rather as partners in a grand project of mutual reinvention.
That’s a big ask. But it gets bigger. Because of our endless delays, we also have
to pull off this massive transformation without delay. The International Energy
Agency warns that if we do not get our emissions under control by a rather
terrifying 2017, our fossil fuel economy will “lock-in” extremely dangerous
warming. “The energy-related infrastructure then in place will generate all the
CO2 emissions allowed” in our carbon budget for limiting warming to 2 degrees
Celsius—“leaving no room for additional power plants, factories and other

infrastructure unless they are zero-carbon, which would be extremely costly.”
This assumes, probably accurately, that governments would be unwilling to
force the closure of still-profitable power plants and factories. As Fatih Birol, the
IEA’s chief economist, bluntly put it: “The door to reach two degrees is about to
close. In 2017 it will be closed forever.” In short, we have reached what some
activists have started calling “Decade Zero” of the climate crisis: we either
change now or we lose our chance.29
All this means that the usual free market assurances—A techno-fix is around
the corner! Dirty development is just a phase on the way to a clean
environment, look at nineteenth-century London!—simply don’t add up. We
don’t have a century to spare for China and India to move past their Dickensian
phases. Because of our lost decades, it is time to turn this around now. Is it
possible? Absolutely. Is it possible without challenging the fundamental logic of
deregulated capitalism? Not a chance.
One of the people I met on this journey and who you will meet in these
pages is Henry Red Cloud, a Lakota educator and entrepreneur who trains
young Native people to become solar engineers. He tells his students that there
are times when we must accept small steps forward—and there are other times
“when you need to run like a buffalo.”30 Now is one of those times when we
must run.

Power, Not Just Energy
I was struck recently by a mea culpa of sorts, written by Gary Stix, a senior
editor of Scientific American. Back in 2006, he edited a special issue on responses
to climate change and, like most such efforts, the articles were narrowly focused
on showcasing exciting low-carbon technologies. But in 2012 Stix wrote that he
had overlooked a much larger and more important part of the story—the need
to create the social and political context in which these technological shifts
stand a chance of displacing the all too profitable status quo. “If we are ever to
cope with climate change in any fundamental way, radical solutions on the
social side are where we must focus, though. The relative efficiency of the next
generation of solar cells is trivial by comparison.”31
This book is about those radical changes on the social side, as well as on the
political, economic, and cultural sides. What concerns me is less the mechanics
of the transition—the shift from brown to green energy, from sole-rider cars to

mass transit, from sprawling exurbs to dense and walkable cities—than the
power and ideological roadblocks that have so far prevented any of these long
understood solutions from taking hold on anything close to the scale required.
It seems to me that our problem has a lot less to do with the mechanics of
solar power than the politics of human power—specifically whether there can
be a shift in who wields it, a shift away from corporations and toward
communities, which in turn depends on whether or not the great many people
who are getting a rotten deal under our current system can build a determined
and diverse enough social force to change the balance of power. I have also
come to understand, over the course of researching this book, that the shift will
require rethinking the very nature of humanity’s power—our right to extract
ever more without facing consequences, our capacity to bend complex natural
systems to our will. This is a shift that challenges not only capitalism, but also
the building blocks of materialism that preceded modern capitalism, a mentality
some call “extractivism.”
Because, underneath all of this is the real truth we have been avoiding:
climate change isn’t an “issue” to add to the list of things to worry about, next to
health care and taxes. It is a civilizational wake-up call. A powerful message—
spoken in the language of fires, floods, droughts, and extinctions—telling us
that we need an entirely new economic model and a new way of sharing this
planet. Telling us that we need to evolve.

Coming Out of Denial
Some say there is no time for this transformation; the crisis is too pressing and
the clock is ticking. I agree that it would be reckless to claim that the only
solution to this crisis is to revolutionize our economy and revamp our worldview
from the bottom up—and anything short of that is not worth doing. There are
all kinds of measures that would lower emissions substantively that could and
should be done right now. But we aren’t taking those measures, are we? The
reason is that by failing to fight these big battles that stand to shift our
ideological direction and change the balance of who holds power in our
societies, a context has been slowly created in which any muscular response to
climate change seems politically impossible, especially during times of economic
crisis (which lately seems to be all the time).

So this book proposes a different strategy: think big, go deep, and move the
ideological pole far away from the stifling market fundamentalism that has
become the greatest enemy to planetary health. If we can shift the cultural
context even a little, then there will be some breathing room for those sensible
reformist policies that will at least get the atmospheric carbon numbers moving
in the right direction. And winning is contagious so, who knows? Maybe within
a few years, some of the ideas highlighted in these pages that sound impossibly
radical today—like a basic income for all, or a rewriting of trade law, or real
recognition of the rights of Indigenous people to protect huge parts of the world
from polluting extraction—will start to seem reasonable, even essential.
For a quarter of a century, we have tried the approach of polite incremental
change, attempting to bend the physical needs of the planet to our economic
model’s need for constant growth and new profit-making opportunities. The
results have been disastrous, leaving us all in a great deal more danger than
when the experiment began.
There are, of course, no guarantees that a more systemic approach will be any
more successful—though there are, as will be explored later on, historical
precedents that are grounds for hope. The truth is that this is the hardest book I
have ever written, precisely because the research has led me to search out such
radical responses. I have no doubt of their necessity, but I question their
political feasibility every day, especially given that climate change puts us on
such a tight and unforgiving deadline.
It’s been a harder book to write for personal reasons too.
What gets me most are not the scary scientific studies about melting glaciers,
the ones I used to avoid. It’s the books I read to my two-year-old. Have You Ever
Seen a Moose? is one of his favorites. It’s about a bunch of kids that really, really,
really want to see a moose. They search high and low—through a forest, a
swamp, in brambly bushes and up a mountain, for “a long legged, bulgy nosed,
branchy antlered moose.” The joke is that there are moose hiding on each page.
In the end, the animals all come out of hiding and the ecstatic kids proclaim:
“We’ve never ever seen so many moose!”
On about the seventy-fifth reading, it suddenly hit me: he might never see a
moose. I tried to hold it together. I went back to my computer and began to
write about my time in northern Alberta, tar sands country, where members of
the Beaver Lake Cree Nation told me about how the moose had changed—one

woman described killing a moose on a hunting trip only to find that the flesh
had already turned green. I heard a lot about strange tumors too, which locals
assumed had to do with the animals drinking water contaminated by tar sands
toxins. But mostly I heard about how the moose were simply gone.
And not just in Alberta. “Rapid Climate Changes Turn North Woods into
Moose Graveyard,” reads a May 2012 headline in Scientific American. A year and
a half later, The New York Times was reporting that one of Minnesota’s two
moose populations had declined from four thousand in the 1990s to just one
hundred today.32
Will he ever see a moose?
Then, the other day, I was slain by a miniature board book called Snuggle
Wuggle. It involves different animals cuddling, with each posture given a
ridiculously silly name: “How does a bat hug?” it asks. “Topsy turvy, topsy
turvy.” For some reason my son reliably cracks up at this page. I explain that it
means upside down, because that’s the way bats sleep.
But all I could think about was the report of some 100,000 dead and dying
bats raining down from the sky in the midst of record-breaking heat across part
of Queensland, Australia. Whole colonies devastated.33
Will he ever see a bat?
I knew I was in trouble when the other day I found myself bargaining with
starfish. Red and purple ones are ubiquitous on the rocky coast of British
Columbia where my parents live, where my son was born, and where I have
spent about half of my adult life. They are always the biggest kid pleasers,
because you can gently pick one up and give it a really good look. “This is the
best day of my life!” my seven-year-old niece Miriam, visiting from Chicago,
proclaimed after a long afternoon spent in the tide pools.
But in the fall of 2013, stories began to appear about a strange wasting disease
that was causing starfish along the Pacific Coast to die by the tens of thousands.
Termed the “sea star wasting syndrome,” multiple species were disintegrating
alive, their vibrant bodies melting into distorted globs, with legs falling off and
bodies caving in. Scientists were mystified.34
As I read these stories, I caught myself praying for the invertebrates to hang
in for just one more year—long enough for my son to be amazed by them. Then
I doubted myself: maybe it’s better if he never sees a starfish at all—certainly not
like this . . .
When fear like that used to creep through my armor of climate change
denial, I would do my utmost to stuff it away, change the channel, click past it.

Now I try to feel it. It seems to me that I owe it to my son, just as we all owe it
to ourselves and one another.
But what should we do with this fear that comes from living on a planet that
is dying, made less alive every day? First, accept that it won’t go away. That it is
a fully rational response to the unbearable reality that we are living in a dying
world, a world that a great many of us are helping to kill, by doing things like
making tea and driving to the grocery store and yes, okay, having kids.
Next, use it. Fear is a survival response. Fear makes us run, it makes us leap, it
can make us act superhuman. But we need somewhere to run to. Without that,
the fear is only paralyzing. So the real trick, the only hope, really, is to allow the
terror of an unlivable future to be balanced and soothed by the prospect of
building something much better than many of us have previously dared hope.
Yes, there will be things we will lose, luxuries some of us will have to give up,
whole industries that will disappear. And it’s too late to stop climate change
from coming; it is already here, and increasingly brutal disasters are headed our
way no matter what we do. But it’s not too late to avert the worst, and there is
still time to change ourselves so that we are far less brutal to one another when
those disasters strike. And that, it seems to me, is worth a great deal.
Because the thing about a crisis this big, this all-encompassing, is that it
changes everything. It changes what we can do, what we can hope for, what we
can demand from ourselves and our leaders. It means there is a whole lot of stuff
that we have been told is inevitable that simply cannot stand. And it means
that a whole lot of stuff we have been told is impossible has to start happening
right away.
Can we pull it off? All I know is that nothing is inevitable. Nothing except
that climate change changes everything. And for a very brief time, the nature of
that change is still up to us.

PART ONE

BAD TIMING
“Coal, in truth, stands not beside but entirely above all other commodities. It is the
material energy of the country—the universal aid—the factor in everything we do.”
—William Stanley Jevons, economist, 18651

“How sad to think that nature speaks and mankind doesn’t listen.”
—Victor Hugo, 18402

1

THE RIGHT IS RIGHT
The Revolutionary Power of Climate Change
“Climate scientists agree: climate change is happening here and now. Based on wellestablished evidence, about 97 percent of climate scientists have concluded that humancaused climate change is happening. This agreement is documented not just by a single
study, but by a converging stream of evidence over the past two decades from surveys of
scientists, content analyses of peer-reviewed studies, and public statements issued by
virtually every membership organization of experts in this field.”
—Report by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 20141

“There is no way this can be done without fundamentally changing the American way of life,
choking off economic development, and putting large segments of our economy out of
business.”
—Thomas J. Donohue, President of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, on ambitious carbon reduction2

There is a question from a gentleman in the fourth row.
He introduces himself as Richard Rothschild. He tells the crowd that he ran
for county commissioner in Maryland’s Carroll County because he had come to
the conclusion that policies to combat global warming were actually “an attack
on middle-class American capitalism.” His question for the panelists, gathered
in a Washington, D.C., Marriott, is: “To what extent is this entire movement
simply a green Trojan horse, whose belly is full with red Marxist socioeconomic
doctrine?”3
At the Heartland Institute’s Sixth International Conference on Climate
Change, held in late June 2011, the premier gathering for those dedicated to
denying the overwhelming scientific consensus that human activity is warming

the planet, this qualifies as a rhetorical question. Like asking a meeting of
German central bankers if Greeks are untrustworthy. Still, the panelists aren’t
going to pass up an opportunity to tell the questioner just how right he is.
First up is Marc Morano, editor of the denialists’ go-to news site Climate
Depot. “In America today we are regulated down to our shower heads, to our
light bulbs, to our washing machines,” he says. And “we’re allowing the
American SUV to die right before our eyes.” If the greens have their way,
Morano warns, we will be looking at “a CO2 budget for every man, woman, and
child on the planet, monitored by an international body.”4
Next is Chris Horner, a senior fellow at the Competitive Enterprise Institute
who specializes in harassing climate scientists with burdensome lawsuits and
Freedom of Information Act fishing expeditions. He angles the table mic over to
his mouth. “You can believe this is about the climate,” he says darkly, “and
many people do, but it’s not a reasonable belief.” Horner, whose prematurely
silver hair makes him look like Anderson Cooper’s frat boy doppelgänger, likes
to invoke 1960s counterculture icon Saul Alinsky: “The issue isn’t the issue.”
The issue, apparently, is that “no free society would do to itself what this agenda
requires. . . . The first step to [doing] that is to remove these nagging freedoms
that keep getting in the way.”5
Claiming that climate change is a plot to steal American freedom is rather
tame by Heartland standards. Over the course of this two-day conference, I will
hear modern environmentalism compared to virtually every mass-murderous
chapter in human history, from the Catholic Inquisition to Nazi Germany to
Stalin’s Russia. I will learn that Barack Obama’s campaign promise to support
locally owned biofuels refineries was akin to Chairman Mao’s scheme to put “a
pig iron furnace in everybody’s backyard” (the Cato Institute’s Patrick
Michaels). That climate change is “a stalking horse for National Socialism”
(former Republican senator and retired astronaut Harrison Schmitt, referencing
the Nazis). And that environmentalists are like Aztec priests, sacrificing
countless people to appease the gods and change the weather (Marc Morano
again).6
But most of all, I will hear versions of the opinion expressed by the county
commissioner in the fourth row: that climate change is a Trojan horse designed
to abolish capitalism and replace it with some kind of “green
communitarianism.” As conference speaker Larry Bell succinctly puts it in his
book Climate of Corruption, climate change “has little to do with the state of the

environment and much to do with shackling capitalism and transforming the
American way of life in the interests of global wealth redistribution.”7
Yes, there is a pretense that the delegates’ rejection of climate science is
rooted in serious disagreement about the data. And the organizers go to some
lengths to mimic credible scientific conferences, calling the gathering
“Restoring the Scientific Method” and even choosing a name, the International
Conference on Climate Change, that produces an organizational acronym,
ICCC, just one letter off from that of the world’s leading authority on climate
change, the United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC), a collaboration of thousands of scientists and 195 governments. But the
various contrarian theses presented at the Heartland conference—tree rings,
sunspots, the Medieval Warm Period—are old news and were thoroughly
debunked long ago. And most of the speakers are not even scientists but rather
hobbyists: engineers, economists, and lawyers, mixed in with a weatherman, an
astronaut, and a “space architect”—all convinced they have outsmarted 97
percent of the world’s climate scientists with their back-of-the-envelope
calculations.8
Australian geologist Bob Carter questions whether warming is happening at
all, while astrophysicist Willie Soon acknowledges some warming has occurred,
but says it has nothing to do with greenhouse emissions and is instead the result
of natural fluctuations in the activity of the sun. Cato’s Patrick Michaels
contradicts them both by conceding that CO2 is indeed increasing
temperatures, but insists the impacts are so minor we should “do nothing” about
it. Disagreement is the lifeblood of any intellectual gathering, but at the
Heartland conference, this wildly contradictory material sparks absolutely no
debate among the deniers—no one attempts to defend one position over
another, or to sort out who is actually correct. Indeed as the temperature graphs
are presented, several members of the mostly elderly audience seem to doze off.9
The entire room comes to life, however, when the rock stars of the
movement take the stage—not the C-team scientists but the A-team ideological
warriors like Morano and Horner. This is the true purpose of the gathering:
providing a forum for die-hard denialists to collect the rhetorical cudgels with
which they will attempt to club environmentalists and climate scientists in the
weeks and months to come. The talking points tested here will jam the
comment sections beneath every article and YouTube video that contains the
phrase “climate change” or “global warming.” They will also fly from the mouths
of hundreds of right-wing commentators and politicians—from Republican

presidential hopefuls all the way down to county commissioners like Richard
Rothschild. In an interview outside the sessions, Joseph Bast, president of the
Heartland Institute, takes credit for “thousands of articles and op-eds and
speeches . . . that were informed by or motivated by somebody attending one of
these conferences.”10
More impressive, though left unspoken, are all the news stories that were
never published and never aired. The years leading up to the gathering had seen
a precipitous collapse of media coverage of climate change, despite a rise in
extreme weather: in 2007, the three major U.S. networks—CBS, NBC, and
ABC—ran 147 stories on climate change; in 2011 the networks ran just
fourteen stories on the subject. That too is the denier strategy at work, because
the goal was never just to spread doubt but also to spread fear—to send a clear
message that saying anything at all about climate change was a surefire way to
find your inbox and comment threads jammed with a toxic strain of vitriol.11
The Heartland Institute, a Chicago-based think tank devoted to “promoting
free-market solutions,” has been holding these confabs since 2008, sometimes
twice a year. And at the time of the gathering, the strategy appeared to be
working. In his address, Morano—whose claim to fame is having broken the
Swift Boat Veterans for Truth story that helped sink John Kerry’s 2004
presidential bid—led the audience through a series of victory laps. Climate
legislation in the U.S. Senate: dead! The U.N. summit on climate change in
Copenhagen: failure! The climate movement: suicidal! He even projected on a
screen a couple of quotes from climate activists beating up on themselves (as
progressives do so well) and exhorted the audience to “celebrate!”12
The only things missing were balloons and confetti descending from the
rafters.
When public opinion on the big social and political issues changes, the trends
tend to be relatively gradual. Abrupt shifts, when they come, are usually
precipitated by dramatic events. Which is why pollsters were so surprised by
what had happened to perceptions about climate change in just four years. A
2007 Harris poll found that 71 percent of Americans believed that the
continued burning of fossil fuels would alter the climate. By 2009 the figure had
dropped to 51 percent. In June 2011 the number was down to 44 percent—well
under half the population. Similar trends have been tracked in the U.K. and
Australia. Scott Keeter, director of survey research at the Pew Research Center

for People & the Press, described the statistics in the United States as “among
the largest shifts over a short period of time seen in recent public opinion
history.”13
The overall belief in climate change has rebounded somewhat since its 2010–
11 low in the United States. (Some have hypothesized that experience with
extreme weather events could be contributing, though “the evidence is at best
very sketchy at this point,” says Riley Dunlap, a sociologist at Oklahoma State
University who specializes in the politics of climate change.) But what remains
striking is that on the right-wing side of the political spectrum, the numbers are
still way down.14
It seems hard to believe today, but as recently as 2008, tackling climate
change still had a veneer of bipartisan support, even in the United States. That
year, Republican stalwart Newt Gingrich did a TV spot with Democratic
congresswoman Nancy Pelosi, then Speaker of the House, in which they
pledged to join forces and fight climate change together. And in 2007, Rupert
Murdoch—whose Fox News channel relentlessly amplifies the climate change
denial movement—launched an incentive program at Fox to encourage
employees to buy hybrid cars (Murdoch announced he had purchased one
himself).
Those days of bipartisanship are decidedly over. Today, more than 75 percent
of self-identified Democrats and liberals believe humans are changing the
climate—a level that, despite yearly fluctuations, has risen only slightly since
2001. In sharp contrast, Republicans have overwhelmingly chosen to reject the
scientific consensus. In some regions, only about 20 percent of self-identified
Republicans accept the science. This political rift can also be found in Canada.
According to an October 2013 poll conducted by Environics, only 41 percent of
respondents who identify with the ruling Conservative Party believe that
climate change is real and human-caused, while 76 percent of supporters of the
left-leaning New Democratic Party and 69 percent of supporters of the centrist
Liberal Party believe it is real. And the same phenomenon has once again been
documented in Australia and the U.K., as well as Western Europe.15
Ever since this political divide opened up over climate change, a great deal of
social science research has been devoted to pinpointing precisely how and why
political beliefs are shaping attitudes toward global warming. According to
Yale’s Cultural Cognition Project, for example, one’s “cultural worldview”—
that would be political leanings or ideological outlook to the rest of us—
explains “individuals’ beliefs about global warming more powerfully than any

other individual characteristic.”16 More powerfully, that is, than age, ethnicity,
education, or party affiliation.
The Yale researchers explain that people with strong “egalitarian” and
“communitarian” worldviews (marked by an inclination toward collective
action and social justice, concern about inequality, and suspicion of corporate
power) overwhelmingly accept the scientific consensus on climate change.
Conversely, those with strong “hierarchical” and “individualistic” worldviews
(marked by opposition to government assistance for the poor and minorities,
strong support for industry, and a belief that we all pretty much get what we
deserve) overwhelmingly reject the scientific consensus.17
The evidence is striking. Among the segment of the U.S. population that
displays the strongest “hierarchical” views, only 11 percent rate climate change
as a “high risk,” compared with 69 percent of the segment displaying the
strongest “egalitarian” views.18
Yale law professor Dan Kahan, the lead author on this study, attributes the
tight correlation between “worldview” and acceptance of climate science to
“cultural cognition,” the process by which all of us—regardless of political
leanings—filter new information in ways that will protect our “preferred vision
of the good society.” If new information seems to confirm that vision, we
welcome it and integrate it easily. If it poses a threat to our belief system, then
our brain immediately gets to work producing intellectual antibodies designed to
repel the unwelcome invasion.19
As Kahan explained in Nature, “People find it disconcerting to believe that
behavior that they find noble is nevertheless detrimental to society, and
behavior that they find base is beneficial to it. Because accepting such a claim
could drive a wedge between them and their peers, they have a strong emotional
predisposition to reject it.” In other words, it is always easier to deny reality than
to allow our worldview to be shattered, a fact that was as true of die-hard
Stalinists at the height of the purges as it is of libertarian climate change deniers
today. Furthermore, leftists are equally capable of denying inconvenient
scientific evidence. If conservatives are inherent system justifiers, and therefore
bridle before facts that call the dominant economic system into question, then
most leftists are inherent system questioners, and therefore prone to skepticism
about facts that come from corporations and government. This can lapse into
the kind of fact resistance we see among those who are convinced that
multinational drug companies have covered up the link between childhood
vaccines and autism. No matter what evidence is marshaled to disprove their

theories, it doesn’t matter to these crusaders—it’s just the system covering up for
itself.
This kind of defensive reasoning helps explain the rise of emotional intensity
that surrounds the climate issue today. As recently as 2007, climate change was
something most everyone acknowledged was happening—they just didn’t seem
to care very much. (When Americans are asked to rank their political concerns
in order of priority, climate change still consistently comes in last.)21
But today there is a significant cohort of voters in many countries who care
passionately, even obsessively, about climate change. What they care about,
however, is exposing it as a “hoax” being perpetrated by liberals to force them to
change their light bulbs, live in Soviet-style tenements, and surrender their
SUVs. For these right-wingers, opposition to climate change has become as
central to their belief system as low taxes, gun ownership, and opposition to
abortion. Which is why some climate scientists report receiving the kind of
harassment that used to be reserved for doctors who perform abortions. In the
Bay Area of California, local Tea Party activists have disrupted municipal
meetings when minor sustainability strategies are being discussed, claiming they
are part of a U.N.-sponsored plot to usher in world government. As Heather
Gass of the East Bay Tea Party put it in an open letter after one such gathering:
“One day (in 2035) you will wake up in subsidized government housing, eating
government subsidized food, your kids will be whisked off by government buses
to indoctrination training centers while you are working at your government
assigned job on the bottom floor of your urban transit center village because you
have no car and who knows where your aging parents will be but by then it will
be too late! WAKE UP!!!!”22
Clearly there is something about climate change that has some people feeling
very threatened indeed.

Unthinkable Truths
Walking past the lineup of tables set up by the Heartland conference’s sponsors,
it’s not terribly hard to see what’s going on. The Heritage Foundation is
hawking reports, as are the Cato Institute and the Ayn Rand Institute. The
climate change denial movement—far from an organic convergence of
“skeptical” scientists—is entirely a creature of the ideological network on
display here, the very one that deserves the bulk of the credit for redrawing the

global ideological map over the last four decades. A 2013 study by Riley Dunlap
and political scientist Peter Jacques found that a striking 72 percent of climate
denial books, mostly published since the 1990s, were linked to right-wing think
tanks, a figure that rises to 87 percent if self-published books (increasingly
common) are excluded.23
Many of these institutions were created in the late 1960s and early 1970s,
when U.S. business elites feared that public opinion was turning dangerously
against capitalism and toward, if not socialism, then an aggressive Keynesianism.
In response, they launched a counterrevolution, a richly funded intellectual
movement that argued that greed and the limitless pursuit of profit were
nothing to apologize for and offered the greatest hope for human emancipation
that the world had ever known. Under this liberationist banner, they fought for
such policies as tax cuts, free trade deals, for the auctioning off of core state
assets from phones to energy to water—the package known in most of the world
as “neoliberalism.”
At the end of the 1980s, after a decade of Margaret Thatcher at the helm in
the U.K. and Ronald Reagan in the United States, and with communism
collapsing, these ideological warriors were ready to declare victory: history was
officially over and there was, in Thatcher’s often repeated words, “no
alternative” to their market fundamentalism. Filled with confidence, the next
task was to systematically lock in the corporate liberation project in every
country that had previously held out, which was usually best accomplished in
the midst of political turmoil and large-scale economic crises, and further
entrenched through free trade agreements and membership in the World Trade
Organization.
It had all been going so well. The project had even managed to survive, more
or less, the 2008 financial collapse directly caused by a banking sector that had
been liberated of so much burdensome regulation and oversight. But to those
gathered here at the Heartland conference, climate change is a threat of a
different sort. It isn’t about the political preferences of Republicans versus
Democrats; it’s about the physical boundaries of the atmosphere and ocean. If
the dire projections coming out of the IPCC are left unchallenged, and business
as usual is indeed driving us straight toward civilization-threatening tipping
points, then the implications are obvious: the ideological crusade incubated in
think tanks like Heartland, Cato, and Heritage will have to come to a
screeching halt. Nor have the various attempts to soft-pedal climate action as
compatible with market logic (carbon trading, carbon offsets, monetizing

nature’s “services”) fooled these true believers one bit. They know very well that
ours is a global economy created by, and fully reliant upon, the burning of fossil
fuels and that a dependency that foundational cannot be changed with a few
gentle market mechanisms. It requires heavy-duty interventions: sweeping bans
on polluting activities, deep subsidies for green alternatives, pricey penalties for
violations, new taxes, new public works programs, reversals of privatizations—
the list of ideological outrages goes on and on. Everything, in short, that these
think tanks—which have always been public proxies for far more powerful
corporate interests—have been busily attacking for decades.
And there is also the matter of “global equity” that keeps coming up in the
climate negotiations. The equity debate is based on the simple scientific fact
that global warming is caused by the accumulation of greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere over two centuries. That means that the countries that got a large
head start on industrialization have done a great deal more emitting than most
others. And yet many of the countries that have emitted least are getting hit by
the impacts of climate change first and worst (the result of geographical bad
luck as well as the particular vulnerabilities created by poverty). To address this
structural inequity sufficiently to persuade fast-growing countries like China and
India not to destabilize the global climate system, earlier emitters, like North
America and Europe, will have to take a greater share of the burden at first. And
there will obviously need to be substantial transfers of resources and technology
to help battle poverty using low carbon tools. This is what Bolivia’s climate
negotiator Angélica Navarro Llanos meant when she called for a Marshall Plan
for the Earth. And it is this sort of wealth redistribution that represents the
direst of thought crimes at a place like the Heartland Institute.
Even climate action at home looks suspiciously like socialism to them; all the
calls for high-density affordable housing and brand-new public transit are
obviously just ways to give backdoor subsidies to the undeserving poor. Never
mind what this war on carbon means to the very premise of global free trade,
with its insistence that geographical distance is a mere fiction to be collapsed by
Walmart’s diesel trucks and Maersk’s container ships.
More fundamentally than any of this, though, is their deep fear that if the
free market system really has set in motion physical and chemical processes that,
if allowed to continue unchecked, threaten large parts of humanity at an
existential level, then their entire crusade to morally redeem capitalism has
been for naught. With stakes like these, clearly greed is not so very good after
all. And that is what is behind the abrupt rise in climate change denial among

hardcore conservatives: they have come to understand that as soon as they
admit that climate change is real, they will lose the central ideological battle of
our time—whether we need to plan and manage our societies to reflect our goals
and values, or whether that task can be left to the magic of the market.
Imagine, for a moment, how all of this looks to a guy like Heartland president
Joseph Bast, a genial bearded fellow who studied economics at the University of
Chicago and who told me in a sit-down interview that his personal calling is
“freeing people from the tyranny of other people.”24 To Bast, climate action
looks like the end of the world. It’s not, or at least it doesn’t have to be, but, for
all intents and purposes, robust, science-based emission reduction is the end of
his world. Climate change detonates the ideological scaffolding on which
contemporary conservatism rests. A belief system that vilifies collective action
and declares war on all corporate regulation and all things public simply cannot
be reconciled with a problem that demands collective action on an
unprecedented scale and a dramatic reining in of the market forces that are
largely responsible for creating and deepening the crisis.
And for many conservatives, particularly religious ones, the challenge goes
deeper still, threatening not just faith in markets but core cultural narratives
about what humans are doing here on earth. Are we masters, here to subdue and
dominate, or are we one species among many, at the mercy of powers more
complex and unpredictable than even our most powerful computers can model?
As Robert Manne, a professor of politics at La Trobe University in Melbourne,
puts it, climate science is for many conservatives “an affront to their deepest and
most cherished basic faith: the capacity and indeed the right of ‘mankind’ to
subdue the Earth and all its fruits and to establish a ‘mastery’ over Nature.” For
these conservatives, he notes, “such a thought is not merely mistaken. It is
intolerable and deeply offensive. Those preaching this doctrine have to be
resisted and indeed denounced.”25
And denounce they do, the more personal, the better—whether it’s former
Vice President Al Gore for his mansions, or famed climate scientist James
Hansen for his speaking fees. Then there is “Climategate,” a manufactured
scandal in which climate scientists’ emails were hacked and their contents
distorted by the Heartlanders and their allies, who claimed to find evidence of
manipulated data (the scientists were repeatedly vindicated of wrongdoing). In
2012, the Heartland Institute even landed itself in hot water by running a
billboard campaign that compared people who believe in climate change
(“warmists” in denialist lingo) to murderous cult leader Charles Manson and

Unabomber Ted Kaczynski. “I still believe in Global Warming. Do you?” the
first ad demanded in bold red letters under a picture of Kaczynski. For
Heartlanders, denying climate science is part of a war, and they act like it.26
Many deniers are quite open about the fact that their distrust of the science
grew out of a powerful fear that if climate change is real, the political
implications would be catastrophic. As British blogger and regular Heartland
speaker James Delingpole has pointed out, “Modern environmentalism
successfully advances many of the causes dear to the left: redistribution of
wealth, higher taxes, greater government intervention, regulation.” Heartland
president Joseph Bast puts it even more bluntly. For the left, “Climate change is
the perfect thing. . . . It’s the reason why we should do everything [the left]
wanted to do anyway.”27
Bast, who has little of the swagger common to so many denialists, is equally
honest about the fact he and his colleagues did not become engaged with
climate issues because they found flaws in the scientific facts. Rather, they
became alarmed about the economic and political implications of those facts
and set out to disprove them. “When we look at this issue, we say, This is a
recipe for massive increase in government,” Bast told me, concluding that,
“Before we take this step, let’s take another look at the science. So conservative
and libertarian groups, I think, stopped and said, Let’s not simply accept this as
an article of faith; let’s actually do our own research.”28
Nigel Lawson, Margaret Thatcher’s former chancellor of the exchequer who
has taken to declaring that “green is the new red,” has followed a similar
intellectual trajectory. Lawson takes great pride in having privatized key British
assets, lowered taxes on the wealthy, and broken the power of large unions. But
climate change creates, in his words, “a new license to intrude, to interfere and
to regulate.” It must, he concludes, be a conspiracy—the classic teleological
reversal of cause and effect.29
The climate change denial movement is littered with characters who are
twisting themselves in similar intellectual knots. There are the old-timer
physicists like S. Fred Singer, who used to develop rocket technologies for the
U.S. military and who hears in emissions regulation a distorted echo of the
communism he fought during the Cold War (as documented compellingly by
Naomi Oreskes and Erik Conway in Merchants of Doubt). In a similar vein, there
is former Czech president Václav Klaus, who spoke at a Heartland climate
conference while still head of state. For Klaus, whose career began under
communist rule, climate change appears to have induced a full-fledged Cold

War flashback. He compares attempts to prevent global warming to “the
ambitions of communist central planners to control the entire society” and says,
“For someone who spent most of his life in the ‘noble’ era of communism this is
impossible to accept.”30
And you can understand that, from their perspective, the scientific reality of
climate change must seem spectacularly unfair. After all, the people at the
Heartland conference thought they had won these ideological wars—if not
fairly, then certainly squarely. Now climate science is changing everything: how
can you win an argument against government intervention if the very
habitability of the planet depends on intervening? In the short term, you might
be able to argue that the economic costs of taking action are greater than
allowing climate change to play out for a few more decades (and some neoliberal
economists, using cost-benefit calculations and future “discounting,” are busily
making those arguments). But most people don’t actually like it when their
children’s lives are “discounted” in someone else’s Excel sheet, and they tend to
have a moral aversion to the idea of allowing countries to disappear because
saving them would be too expensive.
Which is why the ideological warriors gathered at the Marriott have
concluded that there is really only one way to beat a threat this big: by claiming
that thousands upon thousands of scientists are lying and that climate change is
an elaborate hoax. That the storms aren’t really getting bigger, it’s just our
imagination. And if they are, it’s not because of anything humans are doing—or
could stop doing. They deny reality, in other words, because the implications of
that reality are, quite simply, unthinkable.
So here’s my inconvenient truth: I think these hardcore ideologues
understand the real significance of climate change better than most of the
“warmists” in the political center, the ones who are still insisting that the
response can be gradual and painless and that we don’t need to go to war with
anybody, including the fossil fuel companies. Before I go any further, let me be
absolutely clear: as 97 percent of the world’s climate scientists attest, the
Heartlanders are completely wrong about the science. But when it comes to the
political and economic consequences of those scientific findings, specifically the
kind of deep changes required not just to our energy consumption but to the
underlying logic of our liberalized and profit-seeking economy, they have their
eyes wide open. The deniers get plenty of the details wrong (no, it’s not a
communist plot; authoritarian state socialism, as we will see, was terrible for the

environment and brutally extractivist), but when it comes to the scope and
depth of change required to avert catastrophe, they are right on the money.

About That Money . . .
When powerful ideologies are challenged by hard evidence from the real world,
they rarely die off completely. Rather, they become cultlike and marginal. A few
of the faithful always remain to tell one another that the problem wasn’t with
the ideology; it was the weakness of leaders who did not apply the rules with
sufficient rigor. (Lord knows there is still a smattering of such grouplets on the
neo-Stalinist far left.) By this point in history—after the 2008 collapse of Wall
Street and in the midst of layers of ecological crises—free market
fundamentalists should, by all rights, be exiled to a similarly irrelevant status,
left to fondle their copies of Milton Friedman’s Free to Choose and Ayn Rand’s
Atlas Shrugged in obscurity. They are saved from this ignominious fate only
because their ideas about corporate liberation, no matter how demonstrably at
war with reality, remain so profitable to the world’s billionaires that they are
kept fed and clothed in think tanks by the likes of Charles and David Koch,
owners of the diversified dirty energy giant Koch Industries, and ExxonMobil.
According to one recent study, for instance, the denial-espousing think tanks
and other advocacy groups making up what sociologist Robert Brulle calls the
“climate change counter-movement” are collectively pulling in more than $900
million per year for their work on a variety of right-wing causes, most of it in the
form of “dark money”—funds from conservative foundations that cannot be
fully traced.31
This points to the limits of theories like cultural cognition that focus
exclusively on individual psychology. The deniers are doing more than
protecting their personal worldviews—they are protecting powerful political and
economic interests that have gained tremendously from the way Heartland and
others have clouded the climate debate. The ties between the deniers and those
interests are well known and well documented. Heartland has received more
than $1 million from ExxonMobil together with foundations linked to the Koch
brothers and the late conservative funder Richard Mellon Scaife. Just how much
money the think tank receives from companies, foundations, and individuals
linked to the fossil fuel industry remains unclear because Heartland does not
publish the names of its donors, claiming the information would distract from

the “merits of our positions.” Indeed, leaked internal documents revealed that
one of Heartland’s largest donors is anonymous—a shadowy individual who has
given more than $8.6 million specifically to support the think tank’s attacks on
climate science.32
Meanwhile, scientists who present at Heartland climate conferences are
almost all so steeped in fossil fuel dollars that you can practically smell the
fumes. To cite just two examples, the Cato Institute’s Patrick Michaels, who
gave the 2011 conference keynote, once told CNN that 40 percent of his
consulting company’s income comes from oil companies (Cato itself has
received funding from ExxonMobil and Koch family foundations). A
Greenpeace investigation into another conference speaker, astrophysicist Willie
Soon, found that between 2002 and 2010, 100 percent of his new research
grants had come from fossil fuel interests.33
The people paid to amplify the views of these scientists—in blogs, op-eds,
and television appearances—are bankrolled by many of the same sources.
Money from big oil funds the Committee for a Constructive Tomorrow, which
houses Marc Morano’s website, just as it funds the Competitive Enterprise
Institute, one of Chris Horner’s intellectual homes. A February 2013 report in
The Guardian revealed that between 2002 and 2010, a network of anonymous
U.S. billionaires had donated nearly $120 million to “groups casting doubt
about the science behind climate change . . . the ready stream of cash set off a
conservative backlash against Barack Obama’s environmental agenda that
wrecked any chance of Congress taking action on climate change.”34
There is no way of knowing exactly how this money shapes the views of
those who receive it or whether it does at all. We do know that having a
significant economic stake in the fossil fuel economy makes one more prone to
deny the reality of climate change, regardless of political affiliation. For
example, the only parts of the U.S. where opinions about climate change are
slightly less split along political lines are regions that are highly dependent on
fossil fuel extraction—such as Appalachian coal country and the Gulf Coast.
There, Republicans still overwhelmingly deny climate change, as they do across
the country, but many of their Democratic neighbors do as well (in parts of
Appalachia, just 49 percent of Democrats believe in human-created climate
change, compared with 72–77 percent in other parts of the country). Canada
has the same kinds of regional splits: in Alberta, where incomes are soaring
thanks to the tar sands, only 41 percent of residents told pollsters that humans
are contributing to climate change. In Atlantic Canada, which has seen far less

extravagant benefits from fossil fuel extraction, 68 percent of respondents say
that humans are warming the planet.35
A similar bias can be observed among scientists. While 97 percent of active
climate scientists believe humans are a major cause of climate change, the
numbers are radically different among “economic geologists”—scientists who
study natural formations so that they can be commercially exploited by the
extractive industries. Only 47 percent of these scientists believe in humancaused climate change. The bottom line is that we are all inclined to denial
when the truth is too costly—whether emotionally, intellectually, or financially.
As Upton Sinclair famously observed: “It is difficult to get a man to understand
something, when his salary depends upon his not understanding it!”36

Plan B: Get Rich off a Warming World
One of the most interesting findings of the many recent studies on climate
perceptions is the clear connection between a refusal to accept the science of
climate change and social and economic privilege. Overwhelmingly, climate
change deniers are not only conservative but also white and male, a group with
higher than average incomes. And they are more likely than other adults to be
highly confident in their views, no matter how demonstrably false. A much
discussed paper on this topic by sociologists Aaron McCright and Riley Dunlap
(memorably titled “Cool Dudes”) found that as a group, conservative white men
who expressed strong confidence in their understanding of global warming were
almost six times as likely to believe climate change “will never happen” as the
rest of the adults surveyed. McCright and Dunlap offer a simple explanation for
this discrepancy: “Conservative white males have disproportionately occupied
positions of power within our economic system. Given the expansive challenge
that climate change poses to the industrial capitalist economic system, it should
not be surprising that conservative white males’ strong system-justifying
attitudes would be triggered to deny climate change.”37
But deniers’ relative economic and social privilege doesn’t just give them
more to lose from deep social and economic change; it gives them reason to be
more sanguine about the risks of climate change should their contrarian views
turn out to be false. This occurred to me as I listened to yet another speaker at
the Heartland conference display what can only be described as an utter absence
of empathy for the victims of climate change. Larry Bell (the space architect)

drew plenty of laughs when he told the crowd that a little heat isn’t so bad: “I
moved to Houston intentionally!” (Houston was, at that time, in the midst of
what would turn out to be Texas’s worst single-year drought on record.)
Australian geologist Bob Carter offered that “the world actually does better from
our human perspective in warmer times.” And Patrick Michaels said people
worried about climate change should do what the French did after the
devastating 2003 heat wave across Europe killed nearly fifteen thousand people
in France alone: “they discovered Walmart and air-conditioning.”38
I listened to these zingers as an estimated thirteen million people in the Horn
of Africa faced starvation on parched land. What makes this callousness among
deniers possible is their firm belief that if they’re wrong about climate science, a
few degrees of warming isn’t something wealthy people in industrialized
countries have to worry much about.I (“When it rains, we find shelter. When
it’s hot, we find shade,” Texas congressman Joe Barton explained at an energy
and environment subcommittee hearing.)39
As for everyone else, well, they should stop looking for handouts and get busy
making money. (Never mind that the World Bank warned in a 2012 report that
for poor countries, the increased cost of storms, droughts, and flooding is already
so high that it “threatens to roll back decades of sustainable development.”)
When I asked Patrick Michaels whether rich countries have a responsibility to
help poor ones pay for costly adaptations to a warmer climate, he scoffed: There
is no reason to give resources to countries “because, for some reason, their
political system is incapable of adapting.” The real solution, he claimed, was
more free trade.40
Michaels surely knows that free trade is hardly going to help islanders whose
countries are disappearing, just as he is doubtlessly aware that most people on
the planet who are hit hardest by heat and drought can’t solve their problems by
putting a new AC system on their credit cards. And this is where the
intersection between extreme ideology and climate denial gets truly dangerous.
It’s not simply that these “cool dudes” deny climate science because it threatens
to upend their dominance-based worldview. It is that their dominance-based
worldview provides them with the intellectual tools to write off huge swaths of
humanity, and indeed, to rationalize profiting from the meltdown.
Recognizing the threat posed by this empathy-exterminating mind-set—
which the cultural theorists describe as “hierarchical” and “individualistic”—is a
matter of great urgency because climate change will test our moral character like
little before. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce, in its bid to prevent the

Environmental Protection Agency from regulating carbon emissions, argued in a
petition that in the event of global warming, “populations can acclimatize to
warmer climates via a range of behavioral, physiological, and technological
adaptations.”41
It is these adaptations that worry me most of all. Unless our culture goes
through some sort of fundamental shift in its governing values, how do we
honestly think we will “adapt” to the people made homeless and jobless by
increasingly intense and frequent natural disasters? How will we treat the
climate refugees who arrive on our shores in leaky boats? How will we cope as
freshwater and food become ever more scarce?
We know the answers because the process is already under way. The
corporate quest for natural resources will become more rapacious, more violent.
Arable land in Africa will continue to be seized to provide food and fuel to
wealthier nations, unleashing a new stage of neocolonial plunder layered on top
of the most plundered places on earth (as journalist Christian Parenti
documents so well in Tropic of Chaos). When heat stress and vicious storms wipe
out small farms and fishing villages, the land will be handed over to large
developers for mega-ports, luxury resorts, and industrial farms. Once selfsufficient rural residents will lose their lands and be urged to move into
increasingly crowded urban slums—for their own protection, they will be told.
Drought and famine will continue to be used as pretexts to push genetically
modified seeds, driving farmers further into debt.42
In the wealthier nations, we will protect our major cities with costly seawalls
and storm barriers while leaving vast areas of coastline that are inhabited by
poor and Indigenous people to the ravages of storms and rising seas. We may
well do the same on the planetary scale, deploying techno-fixes to lower global
temperatures that will pose far greater risks to those living in the tropics than in
the Global North (more on this later). And rather than recognizing that we owe
a debt to migrants forced to flee their lands as a result of our actions (and
inactions), our governments will build ever more high-tech fortresses and adopt
even more draconian anti-immigration laws. And, in the name of “national
security,” we will intervene in foreign conflicts over water, oil, and arable land,
or start those conflicts ourselves. In short our culture will do what it is already
doing, only with more brutality and barbarism, because that is what our system
is built to do.
In recent years, quite a number of major multinational corporations have
begun to speak openly about how climate change might impact their businesses,

and insurance companies closely track and discuss the increased frequency of
major disasters. The CEO of Swiss Re Americas admitted, for instance, that
“What keeps us up at night is climate change,” while companies like Starbucks
and Chipotle have raised the alarm about how extreme weather may impact the
availability of key ingredients. In June 2014, the Risky Business project, led by
billionaire and former New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg, as well as
former U.S. treasury secretary Henry Paulson and hedge fund founder and
environmental philanthropist Tom Steyer, warned that climate change would
cost the U.S. economy billions of dollars each year as a result of rising sea levels
alone, and that the corporate world must take such climate costs seriously.43
This kind of talk is often equated with support for strong action to prevent
warming. It shouldn’t be. Just because companies are willing to acknowledge the
probable effects of climate change does not mean they support the kinds of
aggressive measures that would significantly reduce those risks by keeping
warming below 2 degrees. In the U.S., for instance, the insurance lobby has
been, by far, the corporate sector most vocal about the mounting impacts, with
the largest companies employing teams of climate scientists to help them
prepare for the disasters to come. And yet the industry hasn’t done much to
push more aggressive climate policy—on the contrary, many companies and
trade groups have provided substantial funding to the think tanks that created
the climate change denial movement.44
For some time, this seemingly contradictory dynamic played out within
different divisions of the Heartland Institute itself. The world’s premier climate
denial institution houses something called the Center on Finance, Insurance,
and Real Estate. Up until May 2012, it was pretty much a mouthpiece for the
insurance industry, headed by conservative Washington insider Eli Lehrer.
What made Lehrer different from his Heartland colleagues, however, is that he
is willing to state matter-of-factly, “Climate change is obviously real and
obviously caused to a significant extent by people. I don’t really think there’s
room for serious debate on either of those points.”45
So even as his Heartland colleagues were organizing global conferences
designed specifically to manufacture the illusion of a serious scientific debate,
Lehrer’s division was working with the insurance lobby to protect their bottom
lines in a future of climate chaos. According to Lehrer, “In general there was no
enormous conflict, day-to-day” between his work and that of his climatechange-denying colleagues.46 That’s because what many of the insurance
companies wanted from Heartland’s advocacy was not action to prevent climate

chaos but rather policies that would safeguard or even increase their profits no
matter the weather. That means pushing government out of the subsidized
insurance business, giving companies greater freedom to raise rates and
deductibles and to drop customers in high-risk areas, as well as other “free
market” measures.
Eventually, Lehrer split away from the Heartland Institute after the think
tank launched its billboard comparing people who believe in climate change to
mass murderers. Since climate change believers include the insurance
companies that were generously funding the Heartland Institute, that stunt
didn’t sit at all well. Still, in an interview, Eli Lehrer was quick to stress that the
differences were over public relations, not policy. “The public policies that
Heartland supported are generally ones I still favor,” he said.47 In truth the work
was more or less compatible. Heartland’s denier division did its best to cast so
much doubt on the science that it helped to paralyze all serious attempts to
regulate greenhouse emissions, while the insurance arm pushed policies that
would allow corporations to stay profitable regardless of the real-world results of
those emissions.
And this points to what really lies behind the casual attitude about climate
change, whether it is being expressed as disaster denialism or disaster capitalism.
Those involved feel free to engage in these high-stakes gambles because they
believe that they and theirs will be protected from the ravages in question, at
least for another generation or so.
On a large scale, many regional climate models do predict that wealthy
countries—most of which are located at higher latitudes—may experience some
economic benefits from a slightly warmer climate, from longer growing seasons
to access to shorter trade routes through the melting Arctic ice. At the same
time, the wealthy in these regions are already finding ever more elaborate ways
to protect themselves from the coming weather extremes. Sparked by events
like Superstorm Sandy, new luxury real estate developments are marketing their
gold-plated private disaster infrastructure to would-be residents—everything
from emergency lighting to natural-gas-powered pumps and generators to
thirteen-foot floodgates and watertight rooms sealed “submarine-style,” in the
case of a new Manhattan condominium. As Stephen G. Kliegerman, the
executive director of development marketing for Halstead Property, told The
New York Times: “I think buyers would happily pay to be relatively reassured
they wouldn’t be terribly inconvenienced in case of a natural disaster.”48

Many large corporations, meanwhile, have their own backup generators to
keep their lights on through mass blackouts (as Goldman Sachs did during
Sandy, despite the fact that its power never actually went out); the capacity to
fortify themselves with their own sandbags (which Goldman also did ahead of
Sandy); and their own special teams of meteorologists (FedEx). Insurance
companies in the United States have even begun dispatching teams of private
firefighters to their high-end customers when their mansions in California and
Colorado are threatened by wildfires, a “concierge” service pioneered by AIG.49
Meanwhile, the public sector continues to crumble, thanks in large part to
the hard work of the warriors here at the Heartland conference. These, after all,
are the fervent dismantlers of the state, whose ideology has eroded so many parts
of the public sphere, including disaster preparedness. These are the voices that
have been happy to pass on the federal budget crisis to the states and
municipalities, which in turn are coping with it by not repairing bridges or
replacing fire trucks. The “freedom” agenda that they are desperately trying to
protect from scientific evidence is one of the reasons that societies will be
distinctly less prepared for disasters when they come.
For a long time, environmentalists spoke of climate change as a great
equalizer, the one issue that affected everyone, rich or poor. It was supposed to
bring us together. Yet all signs are that it is doing precisely the opposite,
stratifying us further into a society of haves and have-nots, divided between
those whose wealth offers them a not insignificant measure of protection from
ferocious weather, at least for now, and those left to the mercy of increasingly
dysfunctional states.

The Meaner Side of Denial
As the effects of climate change become impossible to ignore, the crueler side of
the denial project—now lurking as subtext—will become explicit. It has already
begun. At the end of August 2011, with large parts of the world still suffering
under record high temperatures, the conservative blogger Jim Geraghty
published a piece in The Philadelphia Inquirer arguing that climate change “will
help the U.S. economy in several ways and enhance, not diminish, the United
States’ geopolitical power.” He explained that since climate change will be
hardest on developing countries, “many potentially threatening states will find
themselves in much more dire circumstances.” And this, he stressed, was a good

thing: “Rather than our doom, climate change could be the centerpiece of
ensuring a second consecutive American Century.” Got that? Since people who
scare Americans are unlucky enough to live in poor, hot places, climate change
will cook them, leaving the United States to rise like a phoenix from the flames
of global warming.II50
Expect more of this monstrousness. As the world warms, the ideology so
threatened by climate science—the one that tells us it’s everyone for
themselves, that victims deserve their fate, that we can master nature—will take
us to a very cold place indeed. And it will only get colder, as theories of racial
superiority, barely under the surface in parts of the denial movement, make a
raging comeback.III51 In the grossly unequal world this ideology has done so
much to intensify and lock in, these theories are not optional: they are necessary
to justify the hardening of hearts to the largely blameless victims of climate
change in the Global South and to the predominantly African American cities
like New Orleans that are most vulnerable in the Global North.
In a 2007 report on the security implications of climate change, copublished
by the Center for Strategic and International Studies, former CIA director R.
James Woolsey predicted that on a much warmer planet “altruism and
generosity would likely be blunted.”52 We can already see that emotional
blunting on display from Arizona to Italy. Already, climate change is changing
us, coarsening us. Each massive disaster seems to inspire less horror, fewer
telethons. Media commentators speak of “compassion fatigue,” as if empathy,
and not fossil fuels, was the finite resource.
As if to prove the point, after Hurricane Sandy devastated large parts of New
York and New Jersey, the Koch-backed organization Americans for Prosperity
(AFP) launched a campaign to block the federal aid package going to these
states. “We need to suck it up and be responsible for taking care of ourselves,”
said Steve Lonegan, then director of AFP’s New Jersey chapter.53
And then there is Britain’s Daily Mail newspaper. In the midst of the
extraordinary 2014 winter floods, the tabloid ran a front-page headline asking
its readers to sign a petition calling on the government “to divert some of the
£11 billion a year spent on overseas aid to ease the suffering of British flood
victims.”54 Within days, more than 200,000 people had signed onto the demand
to cut foreign aid in favor of local disaster relief. Of course Britain—the nation
that invented the coal-fired steam engine—has been emitting industrial levels
of carbon for longer than any nation on earth and therefore bears a particularly

great responsibility to increase, as opposed to claw back, foreign aid. But never
mind that. Screw the poor. Suck it up. Everyone for themselves.
Unless we radically change course, these are the values that will rule our
stormy future, even more than they already rule our present.

Coddling Conservatives
Some climate activists have attempted to sway deniers away from their
hardened positions, arguing that delaying climate action will only make the
government interventions required more extreme. The popular climate blogger
Joe Romm, for instance, writes that “if you hate government intrusion into
people’s lives, you’d better stop catastrophic global warming, because nothing
drives a country more towards activist government than scarcity and
deprivation. . . . Only Big Government—which conservatives say they don’t
want—can relocate millions of citizens, build massive levees, ration crucial
resources like water and arable land, mandate harsh and rapid reductions in
certain kinds of energy—all of which will be inevitable if we don’t act now.”55
It’s true that catastrophic climate change would inflate the role of
government to levels that would likely disturb most thinking people, whether
left or right. And there are legitimate fears too of what some call “green
fascism”—an environmental crisis so severe that it becomes the pretext for
authoritarian forces to seize control in the name of restoring some kind of
climate order. But it’s also the case that there is no way to get cuts in emissions
steep or rapid enough to avoid those catastrophic scenarios without levels of
government intervention that will never be acceptable to right-wing ideologues.
This was not always so. If governments, including in the U.S., had started
cutting emissions back when the scientific consensus first solidified, the
measures for avoiding catastrophic warming would not have been nearly so
jarring to the reigning economic model. For instance, the first major
international gathering to set specific targets for emission reductions was the
World Conference on the Changing Atmosphere, held in Toronto in 1988,
with more than three hundred scientists and policymakers from forty-six
countries represented. The conference, which set the groundwork for the Rio
Earth Summit, was a breakthrough, recommending that governments cut
emissions by 20 percent below 1988 levels by 2005. “If we choose to take on this
challenge,” remarked one scientist in attendance, “it appears that we can slow

the rate of change substantially, giving us time to develop mechanisms so that
the cost to society and the damage to ecosystems can be minimized. We could
alternatively close our eyes, hope for the best, and pay the cost when the bill
comes due.”56
If we had heeded this advice and got serious about meeting that goal
immediately after the 1992 signing of the U.N. climate convention in Rio, the
world would have needed to reduce its carbon emissions by about 2 percent per
year until 2005.57 At that rate, wealthy countries could have much more
comfortably started rolling out the technologies to replace fossil fuels, cutting
carbon at home while helping to launch an ambitious green transition
throughout the world. Since this was before the globalization juggernaut took
hold, it would have created an opportunity for China and India and other fastgrowing economies to battle poverty on low-carbon pathways. (Which was the
stated goal of “sustainable development” as championed in Rio.)
Indeed this vision could have been built into the global trade architecture
that would rise up in the early to mid-1990s. If we had continued to reduce our
emissions at that pace we would have been on track for a completely decarbonized global economy by mid-century.
But we didn’t do any of those things. And as the famed climate scientist
Michael Mann, director of the Penn State Earth System Science Center, puts it,
“There’s a huge procrastination penalty when it comes to emitting carbon into
the atmosphere”: the longer we wait, the more it builds up, the more
dramatically we must change to reduce the risks of catastrophic warming. Kevin
Anderson, deputy director of the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research,
further explains: “Perhaps at the time of the 1992 Earth Summit, or even at the
turn of the millennium, 2°C levels of mitigation could have been achieved
through significant evolutionary changes within the political and economic
hegemony. But climate change is a cumulative issue! Now, in 2013, we in highemitting (post)industrial nations face a very different prospect. Our ongoing and
collective carbon profligacy has squandered any opportunity for the
‘evolutionary change’ afforded by our earlier (and larger) 2°C carbon budget.
Today, after two decades of bluff and lies, the remaining 2°C budget demands
revolutionary change to the political and economic hegemony.”58
Put a little more simply: for more than two decades, we kicked the can down
the road. During that time, we also expanded the road from a two-lane carbonspewing highway to a six-lane superhighway. That feat was accomplished in
large part thanks to the radical and aggressive vision that called for the creation

of a single global economy based on the rules of free market fundamentalism,
the very rules incubated in the right-wing think tanks now at the forefront of
climate change denial. There is a certain irony at work: it is the success of their
own revolution that makes revolutionary levels of transformation to the market
system now our best hope of avoiding climate chaos.
Some are advancing a different strategy to bring right-wingers back into the
climate fold. Rather than trying to scare them with scenarios of interventionist
governments if we procrastinate further, this camp argues that we need
approaches to emission reduction that are less offensive to conservative values.
Yale’s Dan Kahan points out that while those who poll as highly
“hierarchical” and “individualist” bridle at any mention of regulation, they tend
to like big, centralized technologies that do not challenge their belief that
humans can dominate nature. In one of his studies, Kahan and his colleagues
polled subjects on their views about climate change after showing some of them
fake news stories. Some of the subjects were given a story about how global
warming could be solved through “anti-pollution” measures. Others were given
a story that held up nuclear power as the solution. Some were shown no story at
all. The scientific facts about global warming were identical in all news stories.
The researchers discovered that hardcore conservatives who received the
nuclear solution story were more open to the scientific facts proving that
humans are changing the climate. However, those who received the story about
fighting pollution “were even more skeptical about these facts than were
hierarchs and individualists in a control group that received no newspaper
story.”59
It’s not hard to figure out why. Nuclear is a heavy industrial technology,
based on extraction, run in a corporatist manner, with long ties to the militaryindustrial complex. And as renowned psychiatrist and author Robert Jay Lifton
has noted, no technology does more to confirm the notion that man has tamed
nature than the ability to split the atom.60
Based on this research, Kahan and others argue, environmentalists should sell
climate action by playing up concerns about national security and emphasizing
responses such as nuclear power and “geoengineering”—global-scale
technological interventions that would attempt to reverse rapid warming by, for
instance, blocking a portion of the sun’s rays, or by “fertilizing” the oceans so
that they trap more carbon, among other untested, extraordinarily high-risk

schemes. Kahan reasons that since climate change is perceived by many on the
right as a gateway to dreaded anti-industry policies, the solution is “to remove
what makes it threatening.” In a similar vein, Irina Feygina and John T. Jost,
who have conducted parallel research at NYU, advise policymakers to package
environmental action as being about protecting “our way of life” and a form of
patriotism, something they revealingly call “system-sanctioned change.”61
This kind of advice has been enormously influential. For instance, the
Breakthrough Institute—a think tank that specialized in attacking grassroots
environmentalism for its supposed lack of “modernity”—is forever charting this
self-styled middle path, pushing nuclear power, fracked natural gas, and
genetically modified crops as climate solutions, while attacking renewable
energy programs. And as we will see later on, some greens are even warming up
to geoengineering.62 Moreover, in the name of reaching across the aisle, green
groups are constantly “reframing” climate action so that it is about pretty much
anything other than preventing catastrophic warming to protect life on earth.
Instead climate action is about all the things conservatives are supposed to care
about more than that, from cutting off revenues to Arab states to reasserting
American economic dominance over China.
The first problem with this strategy is that it doesn’t work: this has been the
core messaging for many large U.S. green groups for five years (“Forget about
climate change,” counsels Jonathan Foley, director of the Institute on the
Environment at the University of Minnesota. “Do you love America?”63) And
as we have seen, conservative opposition to climate action has only hardened in
this period.
The far more troubling problem with this approach is that rather than
challenging the warped values fueling both disaster denialism and disaster
capitalism, it actively reinforces those values. Nuclear power and
geoengineering are not solutions to the ecological crisis; they are a doubling
down on exactly the kind of reckless, short-term thinking that got us into this
mess. Just as we spewed greenhouse gases into the atmosphere thinking that
tomorrow would never come, both of these hugely high-risk technologies would
create even more dangerous forms of waste, and neither has a discernible exit
strategy (subjects that I will be exploring in greater depth later on). Hyperpatriotism, similarly, is an active barrier to coming up with any kind of global
climate agreement, since it further pits countries against one another rather
than encouraging them to cooperate. As for pitching climate action as a way to
protect America’s high-consumerist “way of life”—that is either dishonest or

delusional because a way of life based on the promise of infinite growth cannot
be protected, least of all exported to every corner of the globe.

The Battle of Worldviews
I am well aware that all of this raises the question of whether I am doing the
same thing as the deniers—rejecting possible solutions because they threaten
my ideological worldview. As I outlined earlier, I have long been greatly
concerned about the science of global warming—but I was propelled into a
deeper engagement with it partly because I realized it could be a catalyst for
forms of social and economic justice in which I already believed.
But there are a few important differences to note. First, I am not asking
anyone to take my word on the science; I think that all of us should take the
word of 97 percent of climate scientists and their countless peer-reviewed
articles, as well as every national academy of science in the world, not to
mention establishment institutions like the World Bank and the International
Energy Agency, all of which are telling us we are headed toward catastrophic
levels of warming. Nor am I suggesting that the kind of equity-based responses
to climate change that I favor are inevitable results of the science.
What I am saying is that the science forces us to choose how we want to
respond. If we stay on the road we are on, we will get the big corporate, big
military, big engineering responses to climate change—the world of a tiny group
of big corporate winners and armies of locked-out losers that we have imagined
in virtually every fictional account of our dystopic future, from Mad Max to The
Children of Men to The Hunger Games to Elysium. Or we can choose to heed
climate change’s planetary wake-up call and change course, steer away not just
from the emissions cliff but from the logic that brought us careening to that
precipice. Because what the “moderates” constantly trying to reframe climate
action as something more palatable are really asking is: How can we create
change so that the people responsible for the crisis do not feel threatened by the
solutions? How, they ask, do you reassure members of a panicked,
megalomaniacal elite that they are still masters of the universe, despite the
overwhelming evidence to the contrary?
The answer is: you don’t. You make sure you have enough people on your
side to change the balance of power and take on those responsible, knowing
that true populist movements always draw from both the left and the right. And

rather than twisting yourself in knots trying to appease a lethal worldview, you
set out to deliberately strengthen those values (“egalitarian” and
“communitarian” as the cultural cognition studies cited here describe them)
that are currently being vindicated, rather than refuted, by the laws of nature.
Culture, after all, is fluid. It has changed many times before and can change
again. The delegates at the Heartland conference understand this, which is why
they are so determined to suppress the mountain of evidence proving that their
worldview is a threat to life on earth. The task for the rest of us is to believe,
based on that same evidence, that a very different worldview can be our
salvation.
The Heartlanders understand that culture can shift quickly because they are
part of a movement that did just that. “Economics are the method,” Margaret
Thatcher said, “the object is to change the heart and soul.” It was a mission
largely accomplished. To cite just one example, in 1966, a survey of U.S. college
freshmen found that only about 44 percent of them said that making a lot of
money was “very important” or “essential.” By 2013, the figure had jumped to 82
percent.64
It’s enormously telling that as far back as 1998, when the American
Geophysical Union (AGU) convened a series of focus groups designed to gauge
attitudes toward global warming, it discovered that “Many respondents in our
focus groups were convinced that the underlying cause of environmental
problems (such as pollution and toxic waste) is a pervasive climate of rampant
selfishness and greed, and since they see this moral deterioration to be
irreversible, they feel that environmental problems are unsolvable.”65
Moreover, a growing body of psychological and sociological research shows
that the AGU respondents were exactly right: there is a direct and compelling
relationship between the dominance of the values that are intimately tied to
triumphant capitalism and the presence of anti-environment views and
behaviors. While a great deal of research has demonstrated that having
politically conservative or “hierarchical” views and a pro-industry slant makes
one particularly likely to deny climate change, there is an even larger number of
studies connecting materialistic values (and even free market ideology) to
carelessness not just about climate change, but to a great many environmental
risks. At Knox College in Illinois, psychologist Tim Kasser has been at the
forefront of this work. “To the extent people prioritize values and goals such as
achievement, money, power, status and image, they tend to hold more negative
attitudes towards the environment, are less likely to engage in positive

environmental behaviors, and are more likely to use natural resources
unsustainably,” write Kasser and British environmental strategist Tom
Crompton in their 2009 book, Meeting Environmental Challenges: The Role of
Human Identity.66
In other words, the culture that triumphed in our corporate age pits us
against the natural world. This could easily be a cause only for despair. But if
there is a reason for social movements to exist, it is not to accept dominant
values as fixed and unchangeable but to offer other ways to live—to wage, and
win, a battle of cultural worldviews. That means laying out a vision of the world
that competes directly with the one on harrowing display at the Heartland
conference and in so many other parts of our culture, one that resonates with
the majority of people on the planet because it is true: That we are not apart
from nature but of it. That acting collectively for a greater good is not suspect,
and that such common projects of mutual aid are responsible for our species’
greatest accomplishments. That greed must be disciplined and tempered by both
rule and example. That poverty amidst plenty is unconscionable.
It also means defending those parts of our societies that already express these
values outside of capitalism, whether it’s an embattled library, a public park, a
student movement demanding free university tuition, or an immigrant rights
movement fighting for dignity and more open borders. And most of all, it means
continually drawing connections among these seemingly disparate struggles—
asserting, for instance, that the logic that would cut pensions, food stamps, and
health care before increasing taxes on the rich is the same logic that would blast
the bedrock of the earth to get the last vapors of gas and the last drops of oil
before making the shift to renewable energy.
Many are attempting to draw these connections and are expressing these
alternative values in myriad ways. And yet a robust movement responding to
the climate crisis is not emerging fast enough. Why? Why aren’t we, as a species,
rising to our historical moment? Why are we so far letting “decade zero” slip
away?
It’s rational for right-wing ideologues to deny climate change—to recognize it
would be intellectually cataclysmic. But what is stopping so many who reject
that ideology from demanding the kinds of powerful measures that the
Heartlanders fear? Why aren’t liberal and left political parties around the world
calling for an end to extreme energy extraction and full transitions to renewal
and regeneration-based economies? Why isn’t climate change at the center of
the progressive agenda, the burning basis for demanding a robust and reinvented

commons, rather than an often forgotten footnote? Why do liberal media
outlets still segregate stories about melting ice sheets in their “green” sections—
next to viral videos of cuddly animals making unlikely friendships? Why are so
many of us not doing the things that must be done to keep warming below
catastrophic levels?
The short answer is that the deniers won, at least the first round. Not the
battle over climate science—their influence in that arena is already waning. But
the deniers, and the ideological movement from which they sprang, won the
battle over which values would govern our societies. Their vision—that greed
should guide us, that, to quote the late economist Milton Friedman, “the major
error” was “to believe that it is possible to do good with other people’s
money”—has dramatically remade our world over the last four decades,
decimating virtually every countervailing power.67 Extreme free-market
ideology was locked in through the harsh policy conditions attached to muchneeded loans issued by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. It
shaped the model of export-led development that dotted the developing world
with free trade zones. It was written into countless trade agreements. Not
everyone was convinced by these arguments, not by a long shot. But too many
tacitly accepted Thatcher’s dictum that there is no alternative.
Meanwhile, denigration of collective action and veneration of the profit
motive have infiltrated virtually every government on the planet, every major
media organization, every university, our very souls. As that American
Geophysical Union survey indicated, somewhere inside each of us dwells a
belief in their central lie—that we are nothing but selfish, greedy, selfgratification machines. And if we are that, then what hope do we have of taking
on the grand, often difficult, collective work that will be required to save
ourselves in time? This, without a doubt, is neoliberalism’s single most damaging
legacy: the realization of its bleak vision has isolated us enough from one
another that it became possible to convince us that we are not just incapable of
self-preservation but fundamentally not worth saving.
Yet at the same time, many of us know the mirror that has been held up to us
is profoundly distorted—that we are, in fact, a mess of contradictions, with our
desire for self-gratification coexisting with deep compassion, our greed with
empathy and solidarity. And as Rebecca Solnit vividly documents in her 2009
book, A Paradise Built in Hell, it is precisely when humanitarian crises hit that
these other, neglected values leap to the fore, whether it’s the incredible
displays of international generosity after a massive earthquake or tsunami, or the

way New Yorkers gathered to spontaneously meet and comfort one another after
the 9/11 attacks. Just as the Heartlanders fear, the existential crisis that is
climate change has the power to release these suppressed values on a global and
sustained scale, to provide us with a chance for a mass jailbreak from the house
that their ideology built—a structure already showing significant cracks and
fissures.68
But before that can happen, we need to take a much closer look at precisely
how the legacy of market fundamentalism, and the much deeper cultural
narratives on which it rests, still block critical, life-saving climate action on
virtually every front. The green movement’s mantra that climate is not about
left and right but “right and wrong” has gotten us nowhere. The traditional
political left does not hold all the answers to this crisis. But there can be no
question that the contemporary political right, and the triumphant ideology it
represents, is a formidable barrier to progress.
As the next four chapters will show, the real reason we are failing to rise to
the climate moment is because the actions required directly challenge our
reigning economic paradigm (deregulated capitalism combined with public
austerity), the stories on which Western cultures are founded (that we stand
apart from nature and can outsmart its limits), as well as many of the activities
that form our identities and define our communities (shopping, living virtually,
shopping some more). They also spell extinction for the richest and most
powerful industry the world has ever known—the oil and gas industry, which
cannot survive in anything like its current form if we humans are to avoid our
own extinction. In short, we have not responded to this challenge because we
are locked in—politically, physically, and culturally. Only when we identify
these chains do we have a chance of breaking free.

I. Much of this confidence is based on fantasy. Though the ultra-rich may be able to buy a measure of
protection for a while, even the wealthiest nation on the planet can fall apart in the face of a major shock
(as Hurricane Katrina showed). And no society, no matter how well financed or managed, can truly adapt
to massive natural disasters when one comes fast and furious on the heels of the last.
II. In early 2011, Joe Read, a newly elected representative to the Montana state legislature, made history
by introducing the first bill to officially declare climate change a good thing. “Global warming is beneficial
to the welfare and business climate of Montana,” the bill stated. Read explained, “Even if it does get
warmer, we’re going to have a longer growing season. It could be very beneficial to the state of Montana.
Why are we going to stop this progress?” The bill did not pass.
III. In a telling development, the American Freedom Alliance hosted its own conference challenging the
reality of climate change in Los Angeles in June 2011. Part of the Alliance’s stated mission is “to identify

threats to Western civilization,” and it is known for its fearmongering about “the Islamic penetration of
Europe” and similar supposed designs in the U.S. Meanwhile, one of the books on sale at the Heartland
conference was Going Green by Chris Skates, a fictional “thriller” in which climate activists plot with
Islamic terrorists to destroy America’s electricity grid.

2

HOT MONEY
How Free Market Fundamentalism Helped Overheat the Planet
“We always had hope that next year was gonna be better. And even this year was gonna be
better. We learned slowly, and what didn’t work, you tried it harder the next time. You
didn’t try something different. You just tried harder, the same thing that didn’t work.”
—Wayne Lewis, Dust Bowl survivor, 20121

“As leaders we have a responsibility to fully articulate the risks our people face. If the
politics are not favorable to speaking truthfully, then clearly we must devote more energy to
changing the politics.”
—Marlene Moses, Ambassador to the United Nations for Nauru, 20122

During the globalization wars of the late nineties and early 2000s, I used to
follow international trade law extremely closely. But I admit that as I immersed
myself in the science and politics of climate change, I stopped paying attention
to trade. I told myself that there was only so much abstract, bureaucratic jargon
one person could be expected to absorb, and my quota was filled up with
emission mitigation targets, feed-in tariffs, and the United Nations’ alphabet
soup of UNFCCCs and IPCCs.
Then about three years ago, I started to notice that green energy programs—
the strong ones that are needed to lower global emissions fast—were
increasingly being challenged under international trade agreements, particularly
the World Trade Organization’s rules.
In 2010, for instance, the United States challenged one of China’s wind
power subsidy programs on the grounds that it contained supports for local
industry considered protectionist. China, in turn, filed a complaint in 2012

targeting various renewable energy programs in the European Union, singling
out Italy and Greece (it has also threatened to bring a dispute against
renewables subsidies in five U.S. states). Washington, meanwhile, has launched
a World Trade Organization attack on India’s ambitious Jawaharlal Nehru
National Solar Mission, a large, multiphase solar support program—once again,
for containing provisions, designed to encourage local industry, considered to be
protectionist. As a result, brand-new factories that should be producing solar
panels are now contemplating closure. Not to be outdone, India has signaled
that it might take aim at state renewable energy programs in the U.S.3
This is distinctly bizarre behavior to exhibit in the midst of a climate
emergency. Especially because these same governments can be counted upon to
angrily denounce each other at United Nations climate summits for not doing
enough to cut emissions, blaming their own failures on the other’s lack of
commitment. Yet rather than compete for the best, most effective supports for
green energy, the biggest emitters in the world are rushing to the WTO to
knock down each other’s windmills.
As one case piled on top of another, it seemed to me that it was time to delve
back into the trade wars. And as I explored the issue further, I discovered that
one of the key, precedent-setting cases pitting “free trade” against climate action
was playing out in Ontario, Canada—my own backyard. Suddenly, trade law
became a whole lot less abstract.
Sitting at the long conference table overlooking his factory floor, Paolo
Maccario, an elegant Italian businessman who moved to Toronto to open a solar
factory, has the proud, resigned air of a captain determined to go down with his
ship. He makes an effort to put on a brave face: True, “the Ontario market is
pretty much gone,” but the company will find new customers for its solar panels,
he tells me, maybe in Europe, or the United States. Their products are good,
best in class, and “the cost is competitive enough.”4
As chief operating officer of Silfab Ontario, Maccario has to say these things;
anything else would be a breach of fiduciary duty. But he is also frank that the
last few months have been almost absurdly bad. Old customers are convinced
the factory is going to close down and won’t be able to honor the twenty-fiveyear warranty on the solar panels they purchased. New customers aren’t placing
orders over the same concerns, opting to go with Chinese companies that are
selling less efficient but cheaper modules.I Suppliers who had been planning to

set up their own factories nearby to cut down on transport costs are now keeping
their distance.
Even his own board back home in Italy (Silfab is owned by Silfab SpA,
whose founder was a pioneer in Italian photovoltaic manufacturing) seemed to
be jumping ship. The parent company had committed to invest around $7
million on a custom piece of machinery that, according to Maccario, would
have created solar modules that “have an efficiency that has not been reached
by any manufacturer in China and in the Western world.” But at the last
minute, and after all the research and design for the machinery was complete,
“It was decided that we cannot spend the money to bring the technology here,”
Maccario explains. We put on hair nets and lab coats and he shows me an
empty rectangle in the middle of the factory floor, the space set aside for
equipment that is not coming.
What are the chances he would choose to open this factory here today, given
all that has happened, I ask. At this, all attempts at PR drop away and he
replies, “I would say below zero if such a number exists.”
With his finely tailored wool suit and trim salt and pepper goatee, Maccario
looks as if he should be sipping espresso in a piazza in Turin, working for Fiat
perhaps—not stuck in this concrete box with an unopened yogurt on his desk,
across the street from Imperial Chilled Juice and down the road from the ass end
of an AMC multiplex.
And yet in 2010, the decision to locate the company’s first North American
solar manufacturing plant in Ontario seemed to make a great deal of sense. Back
then the mood in Ontario’s renewable sector was positively giddy. One year
earlier, at the peak of the Wall Street financial crisis, the province had unveiled
its climate action plan, the Green Energy and Green Economy Act, centered on
a bold pledge to wean Canada’s most populous province completely off coal by
2014.5
The plan was lauded by energy experts around the world, particularly in the
U.S., where such ambition was lagging. On a visit to Toronto, Al Gore offered
his highest blessing, proclaiming it “widely recognized now as the single best
green energy [program] on the North American continent.” And Michael T.
Eckhart, then president of the American Council on Renewable Energy,
described it as “the most comprehensive renewable energy policy entered
anywhere around the world.”6
The legislation created what is known as a feed-in tariff program, which
allowed renewable energy providers to sell power back to the grid, offering long-

term contracts with guaranteed premium prices. It also contained a variety of
provisions to ensure that the developers weren’t all big players but that local
municipalities, co-ops, and Indigenous communities could all get into the
renewable energy market and benefit from those premium rates. The catch was
that in order for most of the energy providers to qualify, they had to ensure that
a minimum percentage of their workforces and materials were local to Ontario.
And the province set the bar high: solar energy developers had to source at least
40–60 percent of their content from within the province.7
The provision was an attempt to revive Ontario’s moribund manufacturing
sector, which had long been centered on the Big Three U.S. automakers
(Chrysler, Ford, and General Motors) and was, at that time, reeling from the
near bankruptcy of General Motors and Chrysler. Compounding these
challenges was the fact that Alberta’s tar sands oil boom had sent the Canadian
dollar soaring, making Ontario a much costlier place to build anything.8
In the years that followed the announcement, Ontario’s efforts to get off coal
were plagued by political blunders. Large natural gas and wind developers ran
roughshod over local communities, while the government wasted hundreds of
millions (at least) trying to clean up the unnecessary messes. Yet even with all
these screwups, the core of the program was an undeniable success. By 2012,
Ontario was the largest solar producer in Canada and by 2013, it had only one
working coal-fired power plant left. The local content requirements—as the
“buy local” and “hire local” provisions are called—were also proving to be a
significant boost to the ailing manufacturing sector: by 2014, more than 31,000
jobs had been created and a wave of solar and wind manufacturers had set up
shop.9
Silfab is a great example of how it worked. The Italian owners had already
decided to open a solar panel plant in North America. The company had
considered Mexico but was leaning toward the United States. The obvious
choices, Maccario told me, were California, Hawaii, and Texas, all of which
offered lots of sunshine and corporate incentives, as well as large and growing
markets for their product. Ontario—overcast and cold a lot of the year—wasn’t
“on the radar screen,” he admitted. That changed when the province introduced
the green energy plan with its local-content provisions, which Maccario
described as a “very gutsy and very well intended program.” The provisions
meant that in communities that switched to renewable energy, companies like
his could count on a stable market for their products, one that was protected

from having to compete head-to-head with cheaper solar panels from China. So
Silfab chose Toronto for its first North American solar plant.
Ontario’s politicians loved Silfab. It helped that the building the company
purchased to produce its panels was an abandoned auto parts factory, then
sitting idle like so many others. And many of the workers the company hired
also came from the auto sector—men and women from Chrysler and the
autoparts giant Magna, who had years of experience working with the kind of
robotic arms that are used to assemble Silfab’s high-tech panels. When the plant
opened, Wayne Wright, a laid-off autoworker who landed a job as a production
operator on the Silfab line, spoke movingly about his seventeen-year-old son,
who told him that “finally” his dad’s new job would be “creating a better future
for all the younger kids.”10
And then things started to go very wrong. Just as the U.S. has acted against
local renewable supports in China and India, so Japan and then the European
Union let it be known that they considered Ontario’s local-content requirement
to be a violation of World Trade Organization rules. Specifically, they claimed
that the requirement that a fixed percentage of renewable energy equipment be
made in Ontario would “discriminate against equipment for renewable energy
generation facilities produced outside Ontario.”11
The WTO ruled against Canada, determining that Ontario’s buy-local
provisions were indeed illegal. And the province wasted little time in nixing the
local-content rules that had been so central to its program.12 It was this,
Maccario said, that led his foreign investors to pull their support for factory
expansion. “Seeing all those, for lack of a better term, mixed messages . . . was
the straw that broke the camel’s back.”
It was also why many plants like his could well close, and others have
decided not to open in the first place.

Trade Trumps Climate
From a climate perspective, the WTO ruling was an outrage: if there is to be any
hope of meeting the agreed-upon 2 degree Celsius target, wealthy economies
like Canada must make getting off fossil fuels their top priority. It is a moral
duty, one that the federal government undertook when it signed the Kyoto
Protocol in 1997. Ontario was putting real policies in place to honor that
commitment (unlike the Canadian government as a whole, which has allowed

emissions to balloon, leading it to withdraw from the Kyoto Protocol rather
than face international censure). Most importantly, the program was working.
How absurd, then, for the WTO to interfere with that success—to let trade
trump the planet itself.
And yet from a strictly legal standpoint, Japan and the EU were perfectly
correct. One of the key provisions in almost all free trade agreements involves
something called “national treatment,” which requires governments to make no
distinction between goods produced by local companies and goods produced by
foreign firms outside their borders. Indeed, favoring local industry constitutes
illegal “discrimination.” This was a flashpoint in the free trade wars back in the
1990s, precisely because these restrictions effectively prevent governments from
doing what Ontario was trying to do: create jobs by requiring the sourcing of
local goods as a condition of government support. This was just one of the many
fateful battles that progressives lost in those years.
Defenders of these trade deals argue that protections like Ontario’s buy-local
provisions distort the free market and should be eliminated. Some green energy
entrepreneurs (usually those that purchase their products from China) have
made similar arguments, insisting that it doesn’t matter where solar panel and
wind turbines are produced: the goal should be to get the cheapest products to
the consumer so that the green transition can happen as quickly as possible.
The biggest problem with these arguments is the notion that there is any free
market in energy to be protected from distortion. Not only do fossil fuel
companies receive $775 billion to $1 trillion in annual global subsidies, but they
pay nothing for the privilege of treating our shared atmosphere as a free waste
dump—a fact that has been described by the Stern Review on the Economics of
Climate Change as “the greatest market failure the world has ever seen.” That
freebie is the real distortion, that theft of the sky the real subsidy.13
In order to cope with these distortions (which the WTO has made no
attempt to correct), governments need to take a range of aggressive steps—from
price guarantees to straight subsidies—so that green energy has a fair shot at
competing. We know from experience that this works: Denmark has among the
most successful renewable energy programs in the world, with 40 percent of its
electricity coming from renewables, mostly wind. But it’s significant that the
program was rolled out in the 1980s, before the free trade era began, when there
was no one to argue with the Danish government’s generous subsidies to the
community-controlled energy projects putting up wind turbines (in 1980, new
installations were subsidized by up to 30 percent).14

As Scott Sinclair of the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives has pointed
out, “many of the policies Denmark used to launch its renewable energy industry
would have been inconsistent with . . . international trade and investment
agreements,” since favoring “locally owned cooperatives would conflict with
non-discrimination rules requiring that foreign companies be treated no less
favourably than domestic suppliers.”15
And Aaron Cosbey, a development economist and trade and climate expert
who is generally supportive of the WTO, rightly notes that the promise of local
job creation has been key to the political success of renewable energy programs.
“In many cases the green jobs argument is the deciding factor that convinces
governments to dole out support. And such requirements, if attached to
subsidies or investment privileges, violate WTO obligations.”16
Which is why governments adopting these tried-and-tested policies—of
which there have been far too few—are the ones getting dragged into trade
court, whether China, India, Ontario, or the European Union.
Worse, it’s not only critical supports for renewable energy that are at risk of
these attacks. Any attempt by a government to regulate the sale or extraction of
particularly dirty kinds of fossil fuels is also vulnerable to similar trade
challenges. The European Union, for instance, is considering new fuel quality
standards that would effectively restrict the sales of oil derived from such highcarbon sources as the Alberta tar sands. It’s excellent climate policy, of the kind
we need much more, but the effort has been slowed down by Canada’s not so
subtle threats of trade retaliation. Meanwhile, the European Union is using
bilateral trade talks to try to circumvent longstanding U.S. restrictions on oil
and gas exports, including a decades-old export ban on crude oil. In July 2014, a
leaked negotiating document revealed that Europe is pushing for a “legally
binding commitment” that would guarantee its ability to import fracked gas and
oil from North Dakota’s Bakken formation and elsewhere.17
Almost a decade ago, a WTO official claimed that the organization enables
challenges against “almost any measure to reduce greenhouse gas emissions”—
there was little public reaction at the time, but clearly there should have been.
And the WTO is far from the only trade weapon that can be used in such
battles—so too can countless bilateral and regional free trade and investment
agreements.18
As we will see later on, these trade deals may even give multinationals the
power to overturn landmark grassroots victories against highly controversial
extractive activities like natural gas fracking: in 2012, an oil company began

taking steps to use NAFTA to challenge Quebec’s hard-won fracking
moratorium, claiming it robbed the company of its right to drill for gas in the
province.19 (The case is ongoing.) As more activist victories are won, more such
legal challenges should be expected.
In some of these cases, governments may successfully defend their emissionreducing activities in trade court. But in too many others, they can be relied
upon to cave in early, not wanting to appear anti–free trade (which is likely
what is behind Ontario’s quiet acceptance of the WTO’s ruling against its green
energy plan). These challenges aren’t killing renewable energy; in the U.S. and
China, for instance, the solar market continues to grow impressively. But it is
not happening fast enough. And the legal uncertainty that now surrounds some
of the most significant green energy programs in the world is bogging us down at
the very moment when science is telling us we need to leap ahead. To allow
arcane trade law, which has been negotiated with scant public scrutiny, to have
this kind of power over an issue so critical to humanity’s future is a special kind
of madness. As Nobel Prize–winning economist Joseph Stiglitz puts it, “Should
you let a group of foolish lawyers, who put together something before they
understood these issues, interfere with saving the planet?”20
Clearly not. Steven Shrybman, an international trade and public interest
lawyer who has worked with a broad range of civil society groups to defend
against these trade challenges, says that the problem is structural. “If the trade
rules don’t permit all kinds of important measures to deal with climate change—
and they don’t—then the trade rules obviously have to be rewritten. Because
there is no way in the world that we can have a sustainable economy and
maintain international trade rules as they are. There’s no way at all.”21
This is exactly the sort of commonsense conclusion that has the Heartlanders
so very scared of climate change. Because when people wake up to the fact that
our governments have locked us into dozens of agreements that make important
parts of a robust climate change response illegal, they will have an awfully
powerful argument to oppose any such new deals until the small matter of our
planet’s habitability is satisfactorily resolved.
The same goes for all kinds of free market orthodoxies that threaten our
capacity to respond boldly to this crisis, from the suffocating logic of austerity
that prevents governments from making the necessary investments in lowcarbon infrastructure (not to mention firefighting and flood response), to the
auctioning off of electric utilities to private corporations that, in many cases,
refuse to switch over to less profitable renewables.

Indeed the three policy pillars of the neoliberal age—privatization of the
public sphere, deregulation of the corporate sector, and the lowering of income
and corporate taxes, paid for with cuts to public spending—are each
incompatible with many of the actions we must take to bring our emissions to
safe levels. And together these pillars form an ideological wall that has blocked
a serious response to climate change for decades. Before delving more deeply
into the ways the climate crisis calls for dismantling that wall, it’s helpful to
look a little more closely at the epic case of bad timing that landed us where we
are today.

A Wall Comes Down, Emissions Go Up
If the climate movement had a birthday, a moment when the issue pierced the
public consciousness and could no longer be ignored, it would have to be June
23, 1988. Global warming had been on the political and scientific radar long
before that, however. The basic insights central to our current understanding
date back to the beginning of the second half of the nineteenth century, and the
first scientific breakthroughs demonstrating that burning carbon could be
warming the planet were made in the late 1950s. In 1965, the concept was so
widely accepted among specialists that U.S. president Lyndon B. Johnson was
given a report from his Science Advisory Committee warning that, “Through
his worldwide industrial civilization, Man is unwittingly conducting a vast
geophysical experiment. . . . The climatic changes that may be produced by the
increased CO2 content could be deleterious from the point of view of human
beings.”22
But it wasn’t until James Hansen, then director of NASA’s Goddard Institute
for Space Studies, testified before a packed congressional hearing on June 23,
1988, that global warming became the stuff of chat shows and political speeches.
With temperatures in Washington, D.C., a sweltering 98 degrees Fahrenheit
(still a record for that day), and the building’s air conditioning on the fritz,
Hansen told a room filled with sweaty lawmakers that he had “99 percent
confidence” in “a real warming trend” linked to human activity. In a comment
to The New York Times he added that it was “time to stop waffling” about the
science. Later that same month, hundreds of scientists and policymakers held
the historic World Conference on the Changing Atmosphere in Toronto where
the first emission reductions were discussed. The United Nations’

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the premier scientific
body advising governments on the climate threat, held its first session that
November. By the following year, 79 percent of Americans had heard of the
greenhouse effect—a leap from just 38 percent in 1981.23
The issue was so prominent that when the editors of Time magazine
announced their 1988 “Man of the Year,” they went for an unconventional
choice: “Planet of the Year: Endangered Earth,” read the magazine’s cover line,
over an image of the globe held together with twine, the sun setting ominously
in the background. “No single individual, no event, no movement captured
imaginations or dominated headlines more,” journalist Thomas Sancton
explained, “than the clump of rock and soil and water and air that is our
common home.”24
More striking than the image was Sancton’s accompanying essay. “This year
the earth spoke, like God warning Noah of the deluge. Its message was loud and
clear, and suddenly people began to listen, to ponder what portents the message
held.” That message was so profound, so fundamental, he argued, that it called
into question the founding myths of modern Western culture. Here it is worth
quoting Sancton at length as he described the roots of the crisis:
In many pagan societies, the earth was seen as a mother, a fertile giver of
life. Nature—the soil, forest, sea—was endowed with divinity, and
mortals were subordinate to it. The Judeo-Christian tradition introduced a
radically different concept. The earth was the creation of a monotheistic
God, who, after shaping it, ordered its inhabitants, in the words of
Genesis: “Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth and subdue it:
and have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the fowl of the air
and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.” The idea of
dominion could be interpreted as an invitation to use nature as a
convenience.25
The diagnosis wasn’t original—indeed it was a synthesis of the founding
principles of ecological thought. But to read these words in America’s most
studiously centrist magazine was nothing short of remarkable. For this reason
and others, the start of 1989 felt to many in the environmental movement like a
momentous juncture, as if the thawing of the Cold War and the warming of the
planet were together helping to birth a new consciousness, one in which

cooperation would triumph over domination, and humility before nature’s
complexity would challenge technological hubris.
As governments came together to debate responses to climate change, strong
voices from developing countries spoke up, insisting that the core of the
problem was the high-consumption lifestyle that dominated in the West. In a
speech in 1989, for instance, India’s President R. Venkataraman argued that the
global environmental crisis was the result of developed countries’ “excessive
consumption of all materials and through large-scale industrialization intended
to support their styles of life.”26 If wealthy countries consumed less, then
everyone would be safer.
But if that was the way 1989 began, it would end very differently. In the
months that followed, popular uprisings would spread across the Sovietcontrolled Eastern Bloc, from Poland to Hungary and finally to East Germany
where, in November 1989, the Berlin Wall collapsed. Under the banner “the
End of History,” right-wing ideologues in Washington seized on this moment of
global flux to crush all political competition, whether socialism, Keynesianism,
or deep ecology. They waged a frontal attack on political experimentation, on
the idea that there might be viable ways of organizing societies other than
deregulated capitalism.
Within a decade, all that would be left standing would be their own extreme,
pro-corporate ideology. Not only would the Western consumer lifestyle survive
intact, it would grow significantly more lavish, with U.S. credit card debt per
household increasing fourfold between 1980 and 2010.27 Simultaneously, that
voracious lifestyle would be exported to the middle and upper classes in every
corner of the globe—including, despite earlier protestations, India, where it
would wreak environmental damage on a scale difficult to fathom. The victories
in the new era would be faster and bigger than almost anyone predicted; and the
armies of losers would be left to pick through the ever-growing mountains of
methane-spewing waste.

Trade and Climate: Two Solitudes
Throughout this period of rapid change, the climate and trade negotiations
closely paralleled one another, each winning landmark agreements within a
couple of years of each other. In 1992, governments met for the first United
Nations Earth Summit in Rio, where they signed the United Nations

Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the document that
formed the basis for all future climate negotiations. That same year, the North
American Free Trade Agreement was signed, going into effect two years later.
Also in 1994, negotiations establishing the World Trade Organization
concluded, and the new global trade body made its debut the next year. In 1997,
the Kyoto Protocol was adopted, containing the first binding emission reduction
targets. In 2001, China gained full membership in the WTO, the culmination of
a trade and investment liberalization process that had begun decades earlier.
What is most remarkable about these parallel processes—trade on the one
hand, climate on the other—is the extent to which they functioned as two
solitudes. Indeed, each seemed to actively pretend that the other did not exist,
ignoring the most glaring questions about how one would impact the other.
Like, for example: How would the vastly increased distances that basic goods
would now travel—by carbon-spewing container ships and jumbo jets, as well as
diesel trucks—impact the carbon emissions that the climate negotiations were
aiming to reduce? How would the aggressive protections for technology patents
enshrined under the WTO impact the demands being made by developing
nations in the climate negotiations for free transfers of green technologies to
help them develop on a low-carbon path? And perhaps most critically, how
would provisions that allowed private companies to sue national governments
over laws that impinged on their profits dissuade governments from adopting
tough antipollution regulations, for fear of getting sued?
These questions were not debated by government negotiators, nor was any
attempt made to resolve their obvious contradictions. Not that there was ever
any question about which side would win should any of the competing pledges
to cut emissions and knock down commercial barriers ever come into direct
conflict: the commitments made in the climate negotiations all effectively
functioned on the honor system, with a weak and unthreatening mechanism to
penalize countries that failed to keep their promises. The commitments made
under trade agreements, however, were enforced by a dispute settlement system
with real teeth, and failure to comply would land governments in trade court,
often facing harsh penalties.
In fact, the hierarchy was so clear that the climate negotiators formally
declared their subservience to the trading system from the start. When the U.N.
climate agreement was signed at the Rio Earth Summit in 1992, it made clear
that “measures taken to combat climate change, including unilateral ones,
should not constitute . . . a disguised restriction on international trade.” (Similar

language appears in the Kyoto Protocol.) As Australian political scientist Robyn
Eckersley puts it, this was “the pivotal moment that set the shape of the
relationship between the climate and trade regimes” because, “Rather than push
for the recalibration of the international trade rules to conform with the
requirements of climate protection . . . the Parties to the climate regime have
ensured that liberalized trade and an expanding global economy have been
protected against trade-restrictive climate policies.” This practically guaranteed
that the negotiating process would be unable to reckon with the kinds of bold
but “trade-restrictive” policy options that could have been coordinated
internationally—from buy-local renewable energy programs to restrictions on
trade in goods produced with particularly high carbon footprints.28
A few isolated voices were well aware that the modest gains being made in
the negotiations over “sustainable development” were being actively unmade by
the new trade and investment architecture. One of those voices belonged to
Martin Khor, then director of the Third World Network, which has been a key
advisor to developing country governments in both trade and climate talks. At
the end of the 1992 Rio Earth Summit, Khor cautioned that there was a
“general feeling among Southern country delegates . . . that events outside the
[summit] process were threatening to weaken the South further and to endanger
whatever positive elements exist in” the Rio agenda. The examples he cited
were the austerity policies being pushed at the time by the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, as well as the trade negotiations that would soon
result in the creation of the WTO.29
Another early warning was sounded by Steven Shrybman, who observed a
decade and a half ago that the global export of industrial agriculture had already
dealt a devastating blow to any possible progress on emissions. In a paper
published in 2000, Shrybman argued that “the globalization of agricultural
systems over recent decades is likely to have been one of the most important
causes of overall increases in greenhouse gas emissions.”30
This had far less to do with current debates about the “food miles” associated
with imported versus local produce than with the way in which the trade
system, by granting companies like Monsanto and Cargill their regulatory wish
list—from unfettered market access to aggressive patent protection to the
maintenance of their rich subsidies—has helped to entrench and expand the
energy-intensive, higher-emissions model of industrial agriculture around the
world. This, in turn, is a major explanation for why the global food system now
accounts for between 19 and 29 percent of world greenhouse gas emissions.

“Trade policy and rules actually drive climate change in a very structural way in
respect of food systems,” Shrybman stressed in an interview.31
The habit of willfully erasing the climate crisis from trade agreements
continues to this day: for instance, in early 2014, several negotiating documents
for the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership, a controversial new NAFTA-style
trade deal spanning twelve countries, were released to the public via WikiLeaks
and the Peruvian human rights group RedGE. A draft of the environment
chapter had contained language stating that countries “acknowledge climate
change as a global concern that requires collective action and recognize the
importance of implementation of their respective commitments under the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).” The
language was vague and nonbinding, but at least it was a tool that governments
could use to defend themselves should their climate policies be challenged in a
trade tribunal, as Ontario’s plan was. But a later document showed that U.S.
negotiators had proposed an edit: take out all the stuff about climate change and
UNFCCC commitments. In other words, while trade has repeatedly been
allowed to trump climate, under no circumstances would climate be permitted
to trump trade.32
Nor was it only the trade negotiators who blocked out the climate crisis as
they negotiated agreements that would send emissions soaring and make many
solutions to this problem illegal. The climate negotiations exhibited their own
special form of denial. In the early and mid-1990s, while the first climate
protocol was being drafted, these negotiators, along with the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, hashed out the details of precisely how countries
should measure and monitor how much carbon they were emitting—a necessary
process since governments were on the verge of pledging their first round of
emission reductions, which would need to be reported and monitored.
The emissions accounting system on which they settled was an odd relic of
the pre–free trade era that took absolutely no account of the revolutionary
changes unfolding right under their noses regarding how (and where) the
world’s goods were being manufactured. For instance, emissions from the
transportation of goods across borders—all those container ships, whose traffic
has increased by nearly 400 percent over the last twenty years—are not formally
attributed to any nation-state and therefore no one country is responsible for
reducing their polluting impact. (And there remains little momentum at the
U.N. for changing that, despite the reality that shipping emissions are set to
double or even triple by 2050.)33

And fatefully, countries are responsible only for the pollution they create
inside their own borders—not for the pollution produced in the manufacturing
of goods that are shipped to their shores; those are attributed to the countries
where the goods were produced.34 This means that the emissions that went into
producing, say, the television in my living room, appear nowhere on Canada’s
emissions ledger, but rather are attributed entirely to China’s ledger, because
that is where the set was made. And the international emissions from the
container ship that carried my TV across the ocean (and then sailed back again)
aren’t entered into anyone’s account book.
This deeply flawed system has created a vastly distorted picture of the drivers
of global emissions. It has allowed rapidly de-industrializing wealthy states to
claim that their emissions have stabilized or even gone down when, in fact, the
emissions embedded in their consumption have soared during the free trade era.
For instance, in 2011, the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
published a study of the emissions from industrialized countries that signed the
Kyoto Protocol. It found that while their emissions had stopped growing, that
was partly because international trade had allowed these countries to move their
dirty production overseas. The researchers concluded that the rise in emissions
from goods produced in developing countries but consumed in industrialized
ones was six times greater than the emissions savings of industrialized
countries.35

Cheap Labor, Dirty Energy: A Package Deal
As the free trade system was put in place and producing offshore became the
rule, emissions did more than move—they multiplied. As mentioned earlier,
before the neoliberal era, emissions growth had been slowing, from 4.5 percent
annual increases in the 1960s to about 1 percent a year in the 1990s. But the
new millennium was a watershed: between 2000 and 2008, the growth rate
reached 3.4 percent a year, shooting past the highest IPCC projections of the
day. In 2009, it dipped due to the financial crisis, but made up for lost time with
the historic 5.9 percent increase in 2010 that left climate watchers reeling. (In
mid-2014, two decades after the creation of the WTO, the IPCC finally
acknowledged the reality of globalization and noted in its Fifth Assessment
Report, “A growing share of total anthropogenic CO2 emissions is released in
the manufacture of products that are traded across international borders.”)36

The reason for what Andreas Malm—a Swedish expert on the history of coal
—describes as “the early 21st Century emissions explosion” is straightforward
enough. When China became the “workshop of the world” it also became the
coal-spewing “chimney of the world.” By 2007, China was responsible for two
thirds of the annual increase in global emissions. Some of that was the result of
China’s own internal development—bringing electricity to rural areas, and
building roads. But a lot of it was directly tied to foreign trade: according to one
study, between 2002 and 2008, 48 percent of China’s total emissions was related
to producing goods for export.37
“One of the reasons why we’re in the climate crisis is because of this model of
globalization,” says Margrete Strand Rangnes, executive vice president at Public
Citizen, a Washington-based policy institute that has been at the forefront of
the fight against free trade. And that, she says, is a problem that requires “a
pretty fundamental reformation of our economy, if we’re going to do this
right.”38
International trade deals were only one of the reasons that governments
embraced this particular model of fast-and-dirty, export-led development, and
every country had its own peculiarities. In many cases (though not China’s), the
conditions attached to loans from the International Monetary Fund and World
Bank were a major factor, so was the economic orthodoxy imparted to elite
students at schools like Harvard and the University of Chicago. All of these and
other factors played a role in shaping what was (never ironically) referred to as
the Washington Consensus. Underneath it all is the constant drive for endless
economic growth, a drive that, as will be explored later on, goes much deeper
than the trade history of the past few decades. But there is no question that the
trade architecture and the economic ideology embedded within it played a
central role in sending emissions into hyperdrive.
That’s because one of the primary driving forces of the particular trade system
designed in the 1980s and 1990s was always to allow multinationals the freedom
to scour the globe in search of the cheapest and most exploitable labor force. It
was a journey that passed through Mexico and Central America’s sweatshop
maquiladoras and had a long stopover in South Korea. But by the end of the
1990s, virtually all roads led to China, a country where wages were
extraordinarily low, trade unions were brutally suppressed, and the state was
willing to spend seemingly limitless funds on massive infrastructure projects—
modern ports, sprawling highway systems, endless numbers of coal-fired power
plants, massive dams—all to ensure that the lights stayed on in the factories and

the goods made it from the assembly lines onto the container ships on time. A
free trader’s dream, in other words—and a climate nightmare.
A nightmare because there is a close correlation between low wages and high
emissions, or as Malm puts it, “a causal link between the quest for cheap and
disciplined labor power and rising CO2 emissions.” And why wouldn’t there be?
The same logic that is willing to work laborers to the bone for pennies a day will
burn mountains of dirty coal while spending next to nothing on pollution
controls because it’s the cheapest way to produce. So when the factories moved
to China, they also got markedly dirtier. As Malm points out, Chinese coal use
was declining slightly between 1995 and 2000, only for the explosion in
manufacturing to send it soaring once again. It’s not that the companies moving
their production to China wanted to drive up emissions: they were after the
cheap labor, but exploited workers and an exploited planet are, it turns out, a
package deal. A destabilized climate is the cost of deregulated, global capitalism,
its unintended, yet unavoidable consequence.39
This connection between pollution and labor exploitation has been true
since the earliest days of the Industrial Revolution. But in the past, when
workers organized to demand better wages, and when city dwellers organized to
demand cleaner air, the companies were pretty much forced to improve both
working and environmental standards. That changed with the advent of free
trade: thanks to the removal of virtually all barriers to capital flows,
corporations could pick up and leave every time labor costs started rising. That’s
why many large manufacturers left South Korea for China in the late 1990s, and
it’s why many are now leaving China, where wages are climbing, for Bangladesh,
where they are significantly lower. So while our clothes, electronics, and
furniture may be made in China, the economic model was primarily made in the
U.S.A.
And yet when the subject of climate change comes up in discussion in
wealthy, industrialized countries, the instant response, very often, is that it’s all
China’s fault (and India’s fault and Brazil’s fault and so on). Why bother cutting
our own emissions when everyone knows that the fast developing economies are
the real problem, opening more coal plants every month than we could ever
close?40 This argument is made as if we in the West are mere spectators to this
reckless and dirty model of economic growth. As if it was not our governments
and our multinationals that pushed a model of export-led development that
made all of this possible. It is said as if it were not our own corporations who,
with single-minded determination (and with full participation from China’s

autocratic rulers), turned the Pearl River Delta into their carbon-spewing
special economic zone, with the goods going straight onto container ships
headed to our superstores. All in the name of feeding the god of economic
growth (via the altar of hyper-consumption) in every country in the world.
The victims in all this are regular people: the workers who lose their factory
jobs in Juárez and Windsor; the workers who get the factory jobs in Shenzhen
and Dhaka, jobs that are by this point so degraded that some employers install
nets along the perimeters of roofs to catch employees when they jump, or where
safety codes are so lax that workers are killed in the hundreds when buildings
collapse. The victims are also the toddlers mouthing lead-laden toys; the
Walmart employee expected to work over the Thanksgiving holiday only to be
trampled by a stampede of frenzied customers, while still not earning a living
wage. And the Chinese villagers whose water is contaminated by one of those
coal plants we use as our excuse for inaction, as well as the middle class of
Beijing and Shanghai whose kids are forced to play inside because the air is so
foul.41

A Movement Digs Its Own Grave
The greatest tragedy of all is that so much of this was eminently avoidable. We
knew about the climate crisis when the rules of the new trade system were being
written. After all, NAFTA was signed just one year after governments,
including the United States, signed the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change in Rio. And it was by no means inevitable that these deals
would go through. A strong coalition of North American labor and
environmental groups opposed NAFTA precisely because they knew it would
drive down labor and environmental standards. For a time it even looked as if
they would win.
Public opinion in all three countries was deeply divided, so much so that
when Bill Clinton ran for president in 1992, he pledged that he would not sign
NAFTA until it substantively reflected those concerns. In Canada, Jean
Chrétien campaigned for prime minister against the deal in the election of
1993. Once both were in office, however, the deal was left intact and two
toothless side agreements were tacked on, one for labor and one for
environmental standards. The labor movement knew better than to fall for this
ploy and continued to forcefully oppose the deal, as did many Democrats in the

U.S. But for a complex set of reasons that will be explored later, having to do
with a combination of reflexive political centrism and the growing influence of
corporate “partners” and donors, the leadership of many large environmental
organizations decided to play ball. “One by one, former NAFTA opponents and
skeptics became enthusiastic supporters, and said so publicly,” writes journalist
Mark Dowie in his critical history of the U.S. environmental movement, Losing
Ground. These Big Green groups even created their own pro-NAFTA
organization, the Environmental Coalition for NAFTA—which included the
National Wildlife Federation, the Environmental Defense Fund, Conservation
International, the National Audubon Society, the Natural Resources Defense
Council, and the World Wildlife Fund—which, according to Dowie provided its
“unequivocal support to the agreement.” Jay Hair, then head of the National
Wildlife Federation, even flew to Mexico on an official U.S. trade mission to
lobby his Mexican counterparts, while attacking his critics for “putting their
protectionist polemics ahead of concern for the environment.”42
Not everyone in the green movement hopped on the pro-trade bandwagon:
Greenpeace, Friends of the Earth, and the Sierra Club, as well as many small
organizations, continued to oppose NAFTA. But that didn’t matter to the
Clinton administration, which had what it wanted—the ability to tell a
skeptical public that “groups representing 80 percent of national
[environmental] group membership have endorsed NAFTA.” And that was
important, because Clinton faced an uphill battle getting NAFTA through
Congress, with many in his own party pledging to vote against the deal. John
Adams, then director of the Natural Resources Defense Council, succinctly
described the extraordinarily helpful role played by groups like his: “We broke
the back of the environmental opposition to NAFTA. After we established our
position Clinton only had labor to fight. We did him a big favor.”43
Indeed when the president signed NAFTA into law in 1993, he made a
special point of thanking “the environmental people who came out and worked
through this—many of them at great criticism, particularly in the
environmental movement.” Clinton also made it clear that this victory was
about more than one agreement. “Today we have the chance to do what our
parents did before us. We have the opportunity to remake the world.” He
explained that, “We are on the verge of a global economic expansion. . . .
Already the confidence we’ve displayed by ratifying NAFTA has begun to bear
fruit. We are now making real progress toward a worldwide trade agreement so
significant that it could make the material gains of NAFTA for our country look

small by comparison.” He was referring to the World Trade Organization. And
just in case anyone was still worried about the environmental consequences,
Clinton offered his personal assurance. “We will seek new institutional
arrangements to ensure that trade leaves the world cleaner than before.”44
Standing by the president’s side was his vice president, Al Gore, who had
been largely responsible for getting so many Big Green groups on board. Given
this history, it should hardly come as a surprise that the mainstream
environmental movement has been in no rush to draw attention to the
disastrous climate impacts of the free trade era. To do so would only highlight
their own active role in helping the U.S. government to, in Clinton’s words,
“remake the world.” Much better, as we will see later on, to talk about light
bulbs and fuel efficiency.
The significance of the NAFTA signing was indeed historic, tragically so.
Because if the environmental movement had not been so agreeable, NAFTA
might have been blocked or renegotiated to set a different kind of precedent. A
new trade architecture could have been built that did not actively sabotage the
fragile global climate change consensus. Instead—as had been the promise and
hope of the 1992 Rio Earth Summit—this new architecture could have been
grounded in the need to fight poverty and reduce emissions at the same time. So
for example, trade access to developing countries could have been tied to
transfers of resources and green technology so that critical new electricity and
transit infrastructure was low carbon from the outset. And the deals could have
been written to ensure that any measures taken to support renewable energy
would not be penalized and, in fact, could be rewarded. The global economy
might not have grown as quickly as it did, but it also would not be headed
rapidly off the climate cliff.
The errors of this period cannot be undone, but it is not too late for a new
kind of climate movement to take up the fight against so-called free trade and
build this needed architecture now. That doesn’t—and never did—mean an end
to economic exchange across borders. It does, however, mean a far more
thoughtful and deliberate approach to why we trade and whom it serves.
Encouraging the frenetic and indiscriminate consumption of essentially
disposable products can no longer be the system’s goal. Goods must once again
be made to last, and the use of energy-intensive long-haul transport will need to
be rationed—reserved for those cases where goods cannot be produced locally or
where local production is more carbon-intensive. (For example, growing food in

greenhouses in cold parts of the United States is often more energy intensive
than growing it in warmer regions and shipping it by light rail.)45
According to Ilana Solomon, trade analyst for the Sierra Club, this is not a
fight that the climate movement can avoid. “In order to combat climate change,
there’s a real need to start localizing our economies again, and thinking about
how and what we’re purchasing and how it’s produced. And the most basic rule
of trade law is you can’t privilege domestic over foreign. So how do you tackle
the idea of needing to incentivize local economies, tying together local green
jobs policies with clean energy policies, when that is just a no-go in trade
policy? . . . If we don’t think about how the economy is structured, then we’re
actually never going to the real root of the problem.”46
These kinds of economic reforms would be good news—for unemployed
workers, for farmers unable to compete with cheap imports, for communities
that have seen their manufacturers move offshore and their local businesses
replaced with big box stores. And all of these constituencies would be needed to
fight for these policies, since they represent the reversal of the thirty-year trend
of removing every possible limit on corporate power.

From Frenetic Expansion to Steady States
Challenging free trade orthodoxy is a heavy lift in our political culture; anything
that has been in place for that long takes on an air of inevitability. But, critical
as these shifts are, they are not enough to lower emissions in time. To do that,
we will need to confront a logic even more entrenched than free trade—the
logic of indiscriminate economic growth. This idea has understandably inspired
a good deal of resistance among more liberal climate watchers, who insist that
the task is merely to paint our current growth-based economic model green, so
it’s worth examining the numbers behind the claim.
It is Kevin Anderson of the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research,
and one of Britain’s top climate experts, who has most forcefully built the case
that our growth-based economic logic is now in fundamental conflict with
atmospheric limits. Addressing everyone from the U.K. Department for
International Development to the Manchester City Council, Anderson has
spent more than a decade patiently translating the implications of the latest
climate science to politicians, economists, and campaigners. In clear and
understandable language, the spiky-haired former mechanical engineer (who

used to work in the petrochemical sector) lays out a rigorous road map for
cutting our emissions down to a level that provides a decent shot at keeping
global temperature rise below 2 degrees Celsius.
But in recent years Anderson’s papers and slide shows have become more
alarming. Under titles such as “Climate Change: Going Beyond Dangerous . . .
Brutal Numbers and Tenuous Hope,” he points out that the chances of staying
within anything like safe temperature levels are diminishing fast. With his
colleague Alice Bows-Larkin, an atmospheric physicist and climate change
mitigation expert at the Tyndall Centre, Anderson argues that we have lost so
much time to political stalling and weak climate policies—all while emissions
ballooned—that we are now facing cuts so drastic that they challenge the core
expansionist logic at the heart of our economic system.47
They argue that, if the governments of developed countries want a fifty-fifty
chance of hitting the agreed-upon international target of keeping warming
below 2 degrees Celsius, and if reductions are to respect any kind of equity
principle between rich and poor nations, then wealthy countries need to start
cutting their greenhouse gas emissions by something like 8 to 10 percent a year
—and they need to start right now. The idea that such deep cuts are required
used to be controversial in the mainstream climate community, where the
deadlines for steep reductions always seemed to be far off in the future (an 80
percent cut by 2050, for instance). But as emissions have soared and as tipping
points loom, that is changing rapidly. Even Yvo de Boer, who held the U.N.’s
top climate position until 2009, remarked recently that “the only way”
negotiators “can achieve a 2-degree goal is to shut down the whole global
economy.”48
That is a severe overstatement, yet it underlines Anderson and Bows-Larkin’s
point that we cannot achieve 8 to 10 percent annual cuts with the array of
modest carbon-pricing or green tech solutions usually advocated by Big Green.
These measures will certainly help, but they are simply not enough. That’s
because an 8 to 10 percent drop in emissions, year after year, is virtually
unprecedented since we started powering our economies with coal. In fact, cuts
above 1 percent per year “have historically been associated only with economic
recession or upheaval,” as the economist Nicholas Stern put it in his 2006
report for the British government.49
Even after the Soviet Union collapsed, reductions of this duration and depth
did not happen (the former Soviet countries experienced average annual
reductions of roughly 5 percent over a period of ten years). Nor did this level of

reduction happen beyond a single-year blip after Wall Street crashed in 2008.
Only in the immediate aftermath of the great market crash of 1929 did the
United States see emissions drop for several consecutive years by more than 10
percent annually, but that was the worst economic crisis of modern times.50
If we are to avoid that kind of carnage while meeting our science-based
emissions targets, carbon reduction must be managed carefully through what
Anderson and Bows-Larkin describe as “radical and immediate degrowth
strategies in the US, EU and other wealthy nations.”II51
Now, I realize that this can all sound apocalyptic—as if reducing emissions
requires economic crises that result in mass suffering. But that seems so only
because we have an economic system that fetishizes GDP growth above all else,
regardless of the human or ecological consequences, while failing to place value
on those things that most of us cherish above all—a decent standard of living, a
measure of future security, and our relationships with one another. So what
Anderson and Bows-Larkin are really saying is that there is still time to avoid
catastrophic warming, but not within the rules of capitalism as they are
currently constructed. Which is surely the best argument there has ever been for
changing those rules.52
Rather than pretending that we can solve the climate crisis without rocking
the economic boat, Anderson and Bows-Larkin argue, the time has come to tell
the truth, to “liberate the science from the economics, finance and astrology,
stand by the conclusions however uncomfortable . . . we need to have the
audacity to think differently and conceive of alternative futures.”53
Interestingly, Anderson says that when he presents his radical findings in
climate circles, the core facts are rarely disputed. What he hears most often are
confessions from colleagues that they have simply given up hope of meeting the
2 degree temperature target, precisely because reaching it would require such a
profound challenge to economic growth. “This position is shared by many senior
scientists and economists advising government,” Anderson reports.54
In other words, changing the earth’s climate in ways that will be chaotic and
disastrous is easier to accept than the prospect of changing the fundamental,
growth-based, profit-seeking logic of capitalism. We probably shouldn’t be
surprised that some climate scientists are a little spooked by the radical
implications of their own research. Most of them were quietly measuring ice
cores, running global climate models, and studying ocean acidification, only to
discover, as Australian climate expert and author Clive Hamilton puts it, that

in breaking the news of the depth of our collective climate failure, they “were
unwittingly destabilizing the political and social order.”55
Nonetheless, that order has now been destabilized, which means that the rest
of us are going to have to quickly figure out how to turn “managed degrowth”
into something that looks a lot less like the Great Depression and a lot more
like what some innovative economic thinkers have taken to calling “The Great
Transition.”56
Over the past decade, many boosters of green capitalism have tried to gloss over
the clashes between market logic and ecological limits by touting the wonders of
green tech, or the “decoupling” of environmental impacts from economic
activity. They paint a picture of a world that can continue to function pretty
much as it does now, but in which our power will come from renewable energy
and all of our various gadgets and vehicles will become so much more energyefficient that we can consume away without worrying about the impact.
If only humanity’s relationship with natural resources was that simple. While
it is true that renewable technologies hold tremendous promise to lower
emissions, the kinds of measures that would do so on the scale we need involve
building vast new electricity grids and transportation systems, often from the
ground up. Even if we started construction tomorrow, it would realistically take
many years, perhaps decades, before the new systems were up and running.
Moreover, since we don’t yet have economies powered by clean energy, all that
green construction would have to burn a lot of fossil fuels in the interim—a
necessary process, but one that wouldn’t lower our emissions fast enough. Deep
emission cuts in the wealthy nations have to start immediately. That means that
if we wait for what Bows-Larkin describes as the “whiz-bang technologies” to
come online “it will be too little too late.”57
So what to do in the meantime? Well, we do what we can. And what we can
do—what doesn’t require a technological and infrastructure revolution—is to
consume less, right away. Policies based on encouraging people to consume less
are far more difficult for our current political class to embrace than policies that
are about encouraging people to consume green. Consuming green just means
substituting one power source for another, or one model of consumer goods for a
more efficient one. The reason we have placed all of our eggs in the green tech
and green efficiency basket is precisely because these changes are safely within

market logic—indeed, they encourage us to go out and buy more new, efficient,
green cars and washing machines.
Consuming less, however, means changing how much energy we actually use:
how often we drive, how often we fly, whether our food has to be flown to get to
us, whether the goods we buy are built to last or to be replaced in two years, how
large our homes are. And these are the sorts of policies that have been neglected
so far. For instance, as researchers Rebecca Willis and Nick Eyre argue in a
report for the U.K.’s Green Alliance, despite the fact that groceries represent
roughly 12 percent of greenhouse gas emissions in Britain, “there is virtually no
government policy which is aimed at changing the way we produce,
incentivising farmers for low energy farming, or how we consume, incentivising
consumption of local and seasonal food.” Similarly, “there are incentives to
drive more efficient cars, but very little is done to discourage car dependent
settlement patterns.”58
Plenty of people are attempting to change their daily lives in ways that do
reduce their consumption. But if these sorts of demand-side emission reductions
are to take place on anything like the scale required, they cannot be left to the
lifestyle decisions of earnest urbanites who like going to farmers’ markets on
Saturday afternoons and wearing up-cycled clothing. We will need
comprehensive policies and programs that make low-carbon choices easy and
convenient for everyone. Most of all, these policies need to be fair, so that the
people already struggling to cover the basics are not being asked to make
additional sacrifice to offset the excess consumption of the rich. That means
cheap public transit and clean light rail accessible to all; affordable, energyefficient housing along those transit lines; cities planned for high-density living;
bike lanes in which riders aren’t asked to risk their lives to get to work; land
management that discourages sprawl and encourages local, low-energy forms of
agriculture; urban design that clusters essential services like schools and health
care along transit routes and in pedestrian-friendly areas; programs that require
manufacturers to be responsible for the electronic waste they produce, and to
radically reduce built-in redundancies and obsolescences.III59
And as hundreds of millions gain access to modern energy for the first time,
those who are consuming far more energy than they need would have to
consume less. How much less? Climate change deniers like to claim that
environmentalists want to return us to the Stone Age. The truth is that if we
want to live within ecological limits, we would need to return to a lifestyle
similar to the one we had in the 1970s, before consumption levels went crazy in

the 1980s. Not exactly the various forms of hardship and deprivation evoked at
Heartland conferences. As Kevin Anderson explains: “We need to give newly
industrializing countries in the world the space to develop and improve the
welfare and well-being of their people. This means more cuts in energy use by
the developed world. It also means lifestyle changes which will have most
impact on the wealthy. . . . We’ve done this in the past. In the 1960s and 1970s
we enjoyed a healthy and moderate lifestyle and we need to return to this to
keep emissions under control. It is a matter of the well-off 20 percent in a
population taking the largest cuts. A more even society might result and we
would certainly benefit from a lower carbon and more sustainable way of life.”60
There is no doubt that these types of policies have countless benefits besides
lower emissions. They encourage civic space, physical activity, community
building, as well as cleaner air and water. They also do a huge amount to reduce
inequality, since it is low-income people, often people of color, who benefit
most from improvements in public housing and public transit. And if strong
living-wage and hire-local provisions were included in transition plans, they
could also benefit most from the jobs building and running those expanded
services, while becoming less dependent on jobs in dirty industries that have
been disproportionately concentrated in low-income communities of color.
As Phaedra Ellis-Lamkins of the environmental justice organization Green
for All puts it, “The tools we use to combat climate change are the same tools
we can use to change the game for low-income Americans and people of
color. . . . We need Congress to make the investments necessary to upgrade and
repair our crumbling infrastructure—from building seawalls that protect
shoreline communities to fixing our storm-water systems. Doing so will create
family-sustaining, local jobs. Improving our storm-water infrastructure alone
would put 2 million Americans to work. We need to make sure that people of
color are a part of the business community and workforce building these new
systems.”61
Another way of thinking about this is that what is needed is a fundamental
reordering of the component parts of Gross Domestic Product. GDP is
traditionally understood to consist of consumption plus investment plus
government spending plus net exports. The free market capitalism of the past three
decades has put the emphasis particularly on consumption and trade. But as we
remake our economies to stay within our global carbon budget, we need to see
less consumption (except among the poor), less trade (as we relocalize our
economies), and less private investment in producing for excessive

consumption. These reductions would be offset by increased government
spending, and increased public and private investment in the infrastructure and
alternatives needed to reduce our emissions to zero. Implicit in all of this is a
great deal more redistribution, so that more of us can live comfortably within
the planet’s capacity.
Which is precisely why, when climate change deniers claim that global
warming is a plot to redistribute wealth, it’s not (only) because they are
paranoid. It’s also because they are paying attention.

Growing the Caring Economy, Shrinking the Careless One
A great deal of thought in recent years has gone into how reducing our use of
material resources could be managed in ways that actually improve quality of life
overall—what the French call “selective degrowth.”IV Policies like luxury taxes
could be put in place to discourage wasteful consumption.62 The money raised
could be used to support those parts of our economies that are already lowcarbon and therefore do not need to contract. Obviously a huge number of jobs
would be created in the sectors that are part of the green transition—in mass
transit, renewable energy, weatherization, and ecosystem restoration. And those
sectors that are not governed by the drive for increased yearly profit (the public
sector, co-ops, local businesses, nonprofits) would expand their share of overall
economic activity, as would those sectors with minimal ecological impact (such
as the caregiving professions, which tend to be occupied by women and people
of color and therefore underpaid). “Expanding our economies in these directions
has all sorts of advantages,” Tim Jackson, an economist at the University of
Surrey and author of Prosperity Without Growth, has written. “In the first place,
the time spent by these professions directly improves the quality of our lives.
Making them more and more efficient is not, after a certain point, actually
desirable. What sense does it make to ask our teachers to teach ever bigger
classes? Our doctors to treat more and more patients per hour?”63
There could be other benefits too, like shorter work hours, in part to create
more jobs, but also because overworked people have less time to engage in lowconsumption activities like gardening and cooking (because they are just too
busy). Indeed, a number of researchers have analyzed the very concrete climate
benefits of working less. John Stutz, a senior fellow at the Boston-based Tellus
Institute, envisions that “hours of paid work and income could converge

worldwide at substantially lower levels than is seen in the developed countries
today.” If countries aimed for somewhere around three to four days a week,
introduced gradually over a period of decades, he argues, it could offset much of
the emissions growth projected through 2030 while improving quality of life.64
Many degrowth and economic justice thinkers also call for the introduction
of a basic annual income, a wage given to every person, regardless of income, as
a recognition that the system cannot provide jobs for everyone and that it is
counterproductive to force people to work in jobs that simply fuel consumption.
As Alyssa Battistoni, an editor at the journal Jacobin, writes, “While making
people work shitty jobs to ‘earn’ a living has always been spiteful, it’s now
starting to seem suicidal.”65
A basic income that discourages shitty work (and wasteful consumption)
would also have the benefit of providing much-needed economic security in the
front-line communities that are being asked to sacrifice their health so that oil
companies can refine tar sands oil or gas companies can drill another fracking
well. Nobody wants to have their water contaminated or have their kids suffer
from asthma. But desperate people can be counted on to do desperate things—
which is why we all have a vested interest in taking care of one another so that
many fewer communities are faced with those impossible choices. That means
rescuing the idea of a safety net that ensures that everyone has the basics
covered: health care, education, food, and clean water. Indeed, fighting
inequality on every front and through multiple means must be understood as a
central strategy in the battle against climate change.
This kind of carefully planned economy holds out the possibility of much
more humane, fulfilling lifestyles than the vast majority of us are experiencing
under our current system, which is what makes the idea of a massive social
movement coalescing behind such demands a real possibility. But these policies
are also the most politically challenging.
Unlike encouraging energy efficiency, the measures we must take to secure a
just, equitable, and inspiring transition away from fossil fuels clash directly with
our reigning economic orthodoxy at every level. As we will see, such a shift
breaks all the ideological rules—it requires visionary long-term planning, tough
regulation of business, higher levels of taxation for the affluent, big public sector
expenditure, and in many cases reversals of core privatizations in order to give
communities the power to make the changes they desire. In short, it means
changing everything about how we think about the economy so that our
pollution doesn’t change everything about our physical world.

I. China has of course emerged as the world’s dominant supplier of inexpensive modules, and in that role
has helped to drive dramatic drops in solar prices. It has also flooded the market with cheap panels in
recent years, contributing to a global oversupply that has outpaced demand.
II. And they don’t let developing countries like China and India off the hook. According to their
projections, developing countries can have just one more decade to continue to increase their emissions to
aid their efforts to pull themselves out of poverty while switching over to green energy sources. By 2025,
they would need to be cutting emissions “at an unprecedented 7 per cent” a year as well.
III. A law passed by the European Parliament that would require that all cell phone manufacturers offer a
common battery charger is a small step in the right direction. Similarly, requiring that electronics
manufacturers use recycled metals like copper could save a great many communities from one of the most
toxic mining processes in the world.
IV. In French, “decroissance” has the double meaning of challenging both growth, croissance, and croire,
to believe—invoking the idea of choosing not to believe in the fiction of perpetual growth on a finite
planet.

3

PUBLIC AND PAID FOR
Overcoming the Ideological Blocks to the Next Economy
“We have no option but to reinvent mobility . . . much of India still takes the bus, walks or
cycles—in many cities as much as 20 percent of the population bikes. We do this because
we are poor. Now the challenge is to reinvent city planning so that we can do this as we
become rich.”
—Sunita Narain, director general, Centre for Science and Environment, 20131

“The lady in the Rolls-Royce car is more damaging to morale than a fleet of Göring’s
bombing-planes.”
—George Orwell, The Lion and the Unicorn, 19412

It was a tight vote but on September 22, 2013, residents of Germany’s second
largest city decided to take their power back. On that day, 50.9 percent of
Hamburg’s voters cast their ballots in favor of putting their electricity, gas, and
heating grids under the control of the city, reversing a wave of corporate sell-offs
that took place over a decade earlier.3
It’s a process that has been given a few clunky names, including “remunicipalization” and “re-communalization.” But the people involved tend to
simply refer to their desire for “local power.”
The Our Hamburg–Our Grid coalition made a series of persuasive arguments
in favor of taking back the utilities. A locally controlled energy system would be
concerned with public interests, not profits. Residents would have greater
democratic say in their energy system, they argued, rather than having the
decisions that affect them made in distant boardrooms. And money earned in
the sale of energy would be returned to the city, rather than lost to the

shareholders of multinationals that had control over the grids at the time—a
definite plus during a time of relentless public austerity. “For people it’s selfevident that goods on which everybody is dependent should belong to the
public,” campaign organizer Wiebke Hansen explained in an interview.4
There was something else driving the campaign as well. Many of Hamburg’s
residents wanted to be part of Energiewende: the fast-spreading transition to
green, renewable energy that was sweeping the country, with nearly 25 percent
of Germany’s electricity in 2013 coming from renewables, dominated by wind
and solar but also including some biogas and hydro—up from around 6 percent
in 2000. In comparison, wind and solar made up just 4 percent of total U.S.
electricity generation in 2013. The cities of Frankfurt and Munich, which had
never sold off their energy grids, had already joined the transition and pledged
to move to 100 percent renewable energy by 2050 and 2025, respectively. But
Hamburg and Berlin, which had both gone the privatization route, were lagging
behind. And this was a central argument for proponents of taking back
Hamburg’s grid: it would allow them to get off coal and nuclear and go green.5
Much has been written about Germany’s renewable energy transition—
particularly the speed at which it is being achieved, as well as the ambition of its
future targets (the country is aiming for 55–60 percent renewables by 2035).6
The weaknesses of the program have also been hotly debated, particularly the
question of whether the decision to phase out nuclear energy has led to a
resurgence of coal (more on that next chapter).
In all of this analysis, however, scarce attention has been paid to one key
factor that has made possible what may be the world’s most rapid shift to wind
and solar power: the fact that in hundreds of cities and towns across the country,
citizens have voted to take their energy grids back from the private corporations
that purchased them. As Anna Leidreiter, a climate campaigner with the World
Future Council, observed after the Hamburg vote, “This marks a clear reversal
to the neoliberal policies of the 1990s, when large numbers of German
municipalities sold their public services to large corporations as money was
needed to prop up city budgets.”7
Nor is this some small trend. According to a Bloomberg report, “More than
70 new municipal utilities have started up since 2007, and public operators have
taken over more than 200 concessions to run energy grids from private
companies in that time.” And though there are no national statistics, the
German Association of Local Utilities believes many more cities and towns
than that have taken back control over their grids from outside corporations.8

Most surprising has been the force with which large parts of the German
public have turned against energy privatization. In 2013 in Berlin 83 percent of
participating voters cast their ballots in favor of switching to a publicly owned
power utility based eventually on 100 percent renewable energy. Not enough
people turned out to vote for the decision to be binding (though the campaign
came very close), but the referendum made public opinion so clear that
campaigners are still pushing for a nonprofit cooperative to take over the grid
when the current contract ends.9
Energy privatization reversals—linked specifically to a desire for renewable
energy—have started to spread beyond Germany in recent years, including to
the United States. For instance, in the mid-2000s, residents and local officials in
the liberal city of Boulder, Colorado, began lobbying their privatized power
utility to move away from coal and toward renewable energy. The company, the
Minneapolis-based Xcel Energy, wasn’t particularly interested, so a coalition of
environmentalists and an energetic youth group called New Era Colorado came
to the same conclusion as the voters in Germany: they had to take their grid
back. Steve Fenberg of New Era explains, “We have one of the most carbonintensive energy supplies in the country, and [Boulder] is an environmentally
minded community, and we wanted to change that. We realized that we had no
control over that unless we controlled the energy supply.”10
In 2011, despite being outspent by Xcel by ten to one, the pro-renewables
coalition narrowly won two ballot measures that called on the city of Boulder to
consider buying back its power system.11 The vote did not immediately put the
power utility under public control, but it gave the city the authority and
financing to seriously consider the option (which it is currently doing). The
coalition won another crucial vote in 2013 against an Xcel-supported initiative
that would have blocked the formation of a new public utility, this time by a
wide majority.
These were historic votes: other cities had reversed earlier privatizations
because they were unhappy with the quality of the service or the pricing under
the private operator. But this was the first time a U.S. city was taking these steps
“for the sole purpose of reducing its impact on the planet,” according to Tim
Hillman, a Boulder-based environmental engineer. Indeed the pro–public forces
had put fighting climate change front and center in their campaigns, accusing
Xcel of being just another fossil fuel company standing in the way of much
needed climate action. And according to Fenberg, their vision reaches beyond
Boulder. “We want to show the world that you can actually power a city

responsibly and not pay a lot for it,” he now says. “We want this to be a model,
not just do this one cool thing for ourselves in our community.”12
What stands out about Boulder’s experience is that, unlike some of the
German campaigns, it did not begin with opposition to privatization. Boulder’s
local power movement began with the desire to switch to clean energy,
regardless of who was providing it. Yet in the process of trying to achieve that
goal, these residents discovered that they had no choice but to knock down one
of the core ideological pillars of the free market era: that privately run services
are always superior to public ones. It was an accidental discovery very similar to
the one Ontario residents made when it became clear that their green energy
transition was being undermined by free trade commitments signed long ago.
Though rarely mentioned in climate policy discussions, there is a clear and
compelling relationship between public ownership and the ability of
communities to get off dirty energy. Many of the countries with the highest
commitments to renewable energy are ones that have managed to keep large
parts of their electricity sectors in public (and often local) hands, including the
Netherlands, Austria, and Norway. In the U.S., some of the cities that have set
the most ambitious green energy targets also happen to have public utilities.
Austin, Texas, for instance, is ahead of schedule for meeting its target of 35
percent renewable power by 2020, and Sacramento, California’s, utility is
gearing up to beat a similar target and has set a pioneering goal of reducing
emissions by 90 percent by mid-century. On the other hand, according to John
Farrell, senior researcher at the Minneapolis-based Institute for Local SelfReliance, the attitude of most private players has been, “we’re going to take the
money that we make from selling fossil fuels, and use it to lobby as hard as we
can against any change to the way that we do business.”13
This does not mean that private power monopolies will not offer their
customers the option of purchasing power from renewables as part of a mix that
includes fossil fuels: many do offer that choice, usually at a premium price. And
some offer renewable power exclusively, though this is invariably from largescale hydropower. Nor is it the case that public power will always willingly go
green—there are plenty of publicly owned power utilities that remain hooked
on coal and are highly resistant to change.
However, many communities are discovering that while public utilities often
need to be pressured hard to make emission reductions a priority (a process that
may require fundamental reform to make them more democratic and
accountable to their constituents) private energy monopolies offer no such

option. Answerable chiefly to their shareholders and driven by the need for high
quarterly profits, private companies will voluntarily embrace renewables only if
it won’t impact their earnings or if they are forced to by law. If renewables are
seen as less profitable, at least in the short term, these bottom-line companies
simply won’t make the switch. Which is why, as German antinuclear activist
Ralf Gauger puts it, more and more people are coming to the conclusion that,
“Energy supply and environmental issues should not be left in the hands of
private for-profit interests.”14
This does not mean that the private sector should be excluded from a
transition to renewables: solar and wind companies are already bringing clean
energy to many millions of consumers around the world, including through
innovative leasing models that allow customers to avoid the up-front costs of
purchasing their own rooftop solar panels. But despite these recent successes,
the market has proved extremely volatile and according to projections from the
International Energy Agency, investment levels in clean energy need to
quadruple by 2030 if we are to meet emission targets aimed at staying below 2
degrees Celsius of warming.15
It’s easy to mistake a thriving private market in green energy for a credible
climate action plan, but, though related, they are not the same thing. It’s
entirely possible to have a booming market in renewables, with a whole new
generation of solar and wind entrepreneurs growing very wealthy—and for our
countries to still fall far short of lowering emissions in line with science in the
brief time we have left. To be sure of hitting those tough targets, we need
systems that are more reliable than boom-and-bust private markets. And as a
2013 paper produced by a research team at the University of Greenwich
explains, “Historically, the private sector has played little role in investing in
renewable energy generation. Governments have been responsible for nearly all
such investments. Current experience from around the world, including the
markets of Europe, also shows that private companies and electricity markets
cannot deliver investments in renewables on the scale required.”16
Citing various instances of governments turning to the public sector to drive
their transitions (including the German experience), as well as examples of
large corporate-driven renewable projects that were abandoned by their
investors midstream, the Greenwich research team concludes, “An active role
for government and public sector utilities is thus a far more important condition
for developing renewable energy than any expensive system of public subsidies
for markets or private investors.”17

Sorting out what mechanisms have the best chance of pulling off a dramatic
and enormously high-stakes energy transition has become particularly pressing
of late. That’s because it is now clear that—at least from a technical perspective
—it is entirely possible to rapidly switch our energy systems to 100 percent
renewables. In 2009, Mark Z. Jacobson, a professor of civil and environmental
engineering at Stanford University, and Mark A. Delucchi, a research scientist
at the Institute of Transportation Studies at the University of California, Davis,
authored a groundbreaking, detailed road map for “how 100 percent of the
world’s energy, for all purposes, could be supplied by wind, water and solar
resources, by as early as 2030.” The plan includes not only power generation but
also transportation as well as heating and cooling. Later published in the journal
Energy Policy, the road map is one of several credible studies that have come out
in recent years that show how wealthy countries and regions can shift all, or
almost all, of their energy infrastructure to renewables within a twenty-to-fortyyear time frame.18 Those studies demonstrating the potential for rapid progress
include:
• In Australia, the University of Melbourne’s Energy Institute and the
nonprofit Beyond Zero Emissions have published a blueprint for achieving
a 60 percent solar and 40 percent wind electricity system in an astonishing
ten years.19
• By 2014, the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) had concluded from its own extensive research into weather
patterns that cost-effective wind and solar could constitute nearly 60
percent of the U.S. electricity system by 2030.20
• Among more conservative projections, a major 2012 study by the U.S.
Department of Energy’s National Renewable Energy Laboratory argues that
wind, solar, and other currently available green technologies could meet 80
percent of Americans’ electricity needs by 2050.21
Most promising of all is new work by a team of researchers at Stanford, led by
Mark Jacobson (who coauthored the 2009 global plan). In March 2013, they
published a study in Energy Policy showing that New York state could meet all of
its power needs with renewables by 2030. Jacobson and his colleagues are
developing similar plans for every U.S. state, and have already published
numbers for the country as a whole. “It’s absolutely not true that we need
natural gas, coal or oil—we think it’s a myth,” he told The New York Times.22

“This really involves a large scale transformation,” he says. “It would require
an effort comparable to the Apollo moon project or constructing the interstate
highway system. But it is possible, without even having to go to new
technologies. We really need to just decide collectively that this is the direction
we want to head as a society.” And he is clear on what stands in the way: “The
biggest obstacles are social and political—what you need is the will to do it.”23
In fact it takes more than will: it requires the profound ideological shift
already discussed. Because our governments have changed dramatically since
the days when ambitious national projects were conceived and implemented.
And the imperatives created by the climate crisis are colliding with the
dominant logic of our time on many other fronts.
Indeed every time a new, record-breaking natural disaster fills our screens
with human horror, we have more reminders of how climate change demands
that we invest in the publicly owned bones of our societies, made brittle by
decades of neglect.

Rebuilding, and Reinventing, the Public Sphere
When I first spotted Nastaran Mohit, she was bundled in a long puffy black
coat, a white toque pulled halfway over her eyes, barking orders to volunteers
gathered in an unheated warehouse. “Take a sticky pad and write down what
the needs are,” the fast-talking thirty-year-old was telling a group newly
designated as Team 1. “Okay, head on out. Who is Team 2?”24
It was ten days after Superstorm Sandy made landfall and we were in one of
the hardest-hit neighborhoods in the Rockaways, a long, narrow strip of seaside
communities in Queens, New York. The storm waters had receded but hundreds
of basements were still flooded and power and cell phone service were still out.
The National Guard patrolled the streets in trucks and Humvees, making sure
curfew was observed, but when it came to offering help to those stranded in the
cold and dark, the state and the big aid agencies were largely missing in action.
(Or, more accurately, they were at the other, wealthier end of the Rockaway
peninsula, where these organizations and agencies were a strong and helpful
presence.)25
Seeing this abandonment, thousands of mostly young volunteers had
organized themselves under the banner “Occupy Sandy” (many were veterans of
Occupy Wall Street) and were distributing clothes, blankets, and hot food to

residents of neglected areas. They set up recovery hubs in community centers
and churches, and went door-to-door in the area’s notorious, towering brick
housing projects, some as high as twenty-three stories. “Muck” had become a
ubiquitous verb, as in “Do you need us to come muck out your basement?” If the
answer was yes, a team of eager twenty-somethings would show up on the
doorstep with mops, gloves, shovels, and bleach, ready to get the job done.
Mohit had arrived in the Rockaways to help distribute basic supplies but
quickly noticed a more pressing need: in some areas, absolutely no one was
providing health care. And the need was so great, it scared her. Since the 1950s,
the Rockaways—once a desirable resort destination—had become a dumping
ground for New York’s poor and unwanted: welfare recipients, the elderly,
discharged mental patients. They were crammed into high-rises, many in a part
of the peninsula known locally as the “Baghdad of Queens.”26
As in so many places like it, public services in the Rockaways had been cut to
the bone, and then cut some more. Just six months before the storm, Peninsula
Hospital Center—one of only two hospitals in the area, which served a lowincome and elderly population—had shut down after the state Department of
Health refused to step in. Walk-in clinics had attempted to fill the gap but they
had flooded during the storm and, along with the pharmacies, had not yet
reopened. “This is just a dead-zone,” Mohit sighed.27
So she and friends in Occupy Sandy called all the doctors and nurses they
knew and asked them to bring in whatever supplies they could. Next, they
convinced the owner of an old furrier, damaged in the storm, to let them
convert his storefront on the neighborhood’s main drag into a makeshift MASH
unit. There, amidst the animal pelts hanging from the ceiling, volunteer doctors
and nurses began to see patients, treat wounds, write prescriptions, and provide
trauma counseling.
There was no shortage of patients; in its first two weeks, Mohit estimated
that the clinic helped hundreds of people. But on the day I visited, worries were
mounting about the people still stuck in the high-rises. As volunteers went
door-to-door distributing supplies in the darkened projects, flashlights strapped
to their foreheads, they were finding alarming numbers of sick people. Cancer
and HIV/AIDS meds had run out, oxygen tanks were empty, diabetics were out
of insulin, and addicts were in withdrawal. Some people were too sick to brave
the dark stairwells and multiple flights of stairs to get help; some didn’t leave
because they had nowhere to go and no way to get off the peninsula (subways
and buses were not operating); others feared that if they left their apartments,

their homes would be burglarized. And without cell service or power for their
TVs, many had no idea what was going on outside.
Most shockingly, residents reported that until Occupy Sandy showed up, no
one had knocked on their doors since the storm. Not from the Health
Department, nor the city Housing Authority (responsible for running the
projects), nor the big relief agencies like the Red Cross. “I was like ‘Holy crap,’ ”
Mohit told me. “There was just no medical attention at all.”I28 Referring to the
legendary abandonment of New Orleans’s poor residents when the city flooded
in 2005, she said: “This is Katrina 2.0.”29
The most frustrating part was that even when a pressing health need was
identified, and even when the volunteer doctors wrote the required
prescriptions, “we bring it to the pharmacy and the pharmacy is sending it back
to us because they need insurance information. And then we get as much
information as we can and we bring it back and they say, ‘Now we need their
Social Security number.’ ”30
According to a 2009 Harvard Medical School study, as many as 45,000
people die annually in the United States because they lack health insurance. As
one of the study’s coauthors pointed out, this works out to about one death
every twelve minutes. It’s unclear how President Obama’s stunted 2010 health
care law will change those numbers, but watching the insurance companies
continue to put money before human health in the midst of the worst storm in
New York’s history cast this preexisting injustice in a new, more urgent light.
“We need universal health care,” Mohit declared. “There is no other way
around it. There is absolutely no other way around it.” Anyone who disagreed
should come to the disaster zone, she said, because this “is a perfect situation for
people to really examine how nonsensical, inhumane, and barbaric this system
is.”31
The word “apocalypse” derives from the Greek apokalypsis, which means
“something uncovered” or revealed. Besides the need for a dramatically better
health care system, there was much else uncovered and revealed when the
floodwaters retreated in New York that October. The disaster revealed how
dangerous it is to be dependent on centralized forms of energy that can be
knocked out in one blow. It revealed the life-and-death cost of social isolation,
since it was the people who did not know their neighbors, or who were
frightened of them, who were most at risk. Meanwhile, it was the tightest-knit
communities, where neighbors took responsibility for one another’s safety, that
were best able to literally weather the storm.

The disaster also revealed the huge risks that come with deep inequality,
since the people who were already the most vulnerable—undocumented
workers, the formerly incarcerated, people in public housing—suffered most and
longest. In low-income neighborhoods, homes filled not only with water but
with heavy chemicals and detergents—the legacy of systemic environmental
racism that allowed toxic industries to build in areas inhabited mostly by people
of color. Public housing projects that had been left to decay—while the city
bided its time before selling them off to developers—turned into death traps,
their ancient plumbing and electrical systems giving way completely. As Aria
Doe, executive director of the Action Center for Education and Community
Development in the Rockaways, put it, the peninsula’s poorest residents “were
six feet under” before the storm even hit. “Right now, they’re seven or eight feet
under.”32
All around the world, the hard realities of a warming world are crashing up
against the brutal logic of austerity, revealing just how untenable it is to starve
the public sphere at the very moment we need it most. The floods that hit the
U.K. in the winter of 2013–2014, for instance, would have been trying for any
government: thousands of homes and workplaces were inundated, hundreds of
thousands of houses and other buildings lost power, farmland was submerged,
several rail lines were down for weeks, all combining to create what one top
official called an “almost unparalleled natural disaster.” This as the country was
still reeling from a previous devastating storm that had struck just two months
before.33
But the floods were particularly awkward for the coalition government led by
Conservative prime minister David Cameron because, in the three years prior, it
had gutted the Environment Agency (EA), which was responsible for dealing
with flooding. Since 2009, at least 1,150 jobs had been lost at the agency, with
as many as 1,700 more on the chopping block, adding up to approximately a
quarter of its total workforce. In 2012 The Guardian had revealed that “nearly
300 flood defence schemes across England [had] been left unbuilt due to
government budget cuts.” The head of the Environment Agency had stated
plainly during the most recent round of cuts that “Flood risk maintenance will
be impacted.”34
Cameron is no climate change denier, which is what made it all the more
incredible that he had hobbled the agency responsible for protecting the public

from rising waters and more ferocious storms, two well-understood impacts of
climate change. And his praise of the good works of the staff that had survived
his axe provided cold comfort. “It is a disgrace that the Government is happy to
put cost cutting before public safety and protecting family homes,” announced
the trade union representing EA workers in a scathing statement. “They can’t
have it both ways, praising the sterling work of members in the Agency in one
breath, and in the next breath announcing further damaging cuts.”35
During good times, it’s easy to deride “big government” and talk about the
inevitability of cutbacks. But during disasters, most everyone loses their free
market religion and wants to know that their government has their backs. And
if there is one thing we can be sure of, it’s that extreme weather events like
Superstorm Sandy, Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines, and the British floods—
disasters that, combined, pummeled coastlines beyond recognition, ravaged
millions of homes, and killed many thousands—are going to keep coming.
Over the course of the 1970s, there were 660 reported disasters around the
world, including droughts, floods, extreme temperature events, wildfires, and
storms. In the 2000s, there were 3,322—a fivefold boost. That is a staggering
increase in just over thirty years, and clearly global warming cannot be said to
have “caused” all of it. But the climate signal is also clear. “There’s no question
that climate change has increased the frequency of certain types of extreme
weather events,” climate scientist Michael Mann told me in an interview,
“including drought, intense hurricanes, and super typhoons, the frequency and
intensity and duration of heat waves, and potentially other types of extreme
weather though the details are still being debated within the scientific
community.”36
Yet these are the same three decades in which almost every government in
the world has been steadily chipping away at the health and resilience of the
public sphere. And it is this neglect that, over and over again, turns natural
disasters into unnatural catastrophes. Storms burst through neglected levees.
Heavy rain causes decrepit sewer systems to back up and overflow. Wildfires
rage out of control for lack of workers and equipment to fight them (in Greece,
fire departments can’t afford spare tires for their trucks driving into forest
blazes). Emergency responders are missing in action for days after a major
hurricane. Bridges and tunnels, left in a state of disrepair, collapse under the
added pressure.
The costs of coping with increasing weather extremes are astronomical. In
the United States, each major disaster seems to cost taxpayers upward of a

billion dollars. The cost of Superstorm Sandy is estimated at $65 billion. And
that was just one year after Hurricane Irene caused around $10 billion in
damage, just one episode in a year that saw fourteen billion-dollar disasters in
the U.S. alone. Globally, 2011 holds the title as the costliest year ever for
disasters, with total damages reaching at least $380 billion. And with
policymakers still locked in the vise grip of austerity logic, these rising
emergency expenditures are being offset with cuts to everyday public spending,
which will make societies even more vulnerable during the next disaster—a
classic vicious cycle.37
It was never a good idea to neglect the foundations of our societies in this
way. In the context of climate change, however, that decision looks suicidal.
There are many important debates to be had about the best way to respond to
climate change—storm walls or ecosystem restoration? Decentralized
renewables, industrial scale wind power combined with natural gas, or nuclear
power? Small-scale organic farms or industrial food systems? There is, however,
no scenario in which we can avoid wartime levels of spending in the public
sector—not if we are serious about preventing catastrophic levels of warming,
and minimizing the destructive potential of the coming storms.
It’s no mystery where that public money needs to be spent. Much of it should
go to the kinds of ambitious emission-reducing projects already discussed—the
smart grids, the light rail, the citywide composting systems, the building
retrofits, the visionary transit systems, the urban redesigns to keep us from
spending half our lives in traffic jams. The private sector is ill suited to taking
on most of these large infrastructure investments: if the services are to be
accessible, which they must be in order to be effective, the profit margins that
attract private players simply aren’t there.
Transit is a good example. In March 2014, when air pollution in French
cities reached dangerously high levels, officials in Paris made a snap decision to
discourage car use by making public transit free for three days. Obviously private
operators would strenuously resist such measures. And yet by all rights, our
transit systems should be responding with the same kind of urgency to
dangerously high levels of atmospheric carbon. Rather than allowing subway
and bus fares to rise while service erodes, we need to be lowering prices and
expanding services—regardless of the costs.
Public dollars also need to go to the equally important, though less glamorous
projects and services that will help us prepare for the coming heavy weather.
That includes things like hiring more firefighters and improving storm barriers.

And it means coming up with new, nonprofit disaster insurance programs so
that people who have lost everything to a hurricane or a forest fire are not left at
the mercy of a private insurance industry that is already adapting to climate
change by avoiding payouts and slapping victims with massive rate increases.
According to Amy Bach, cofounder of the San Francisco–based advocacy group
United Policyholders, disaster insurance is becoming “very much like health
insurance. We’re going to have to increasingly take the profit motive out of the
system so that it operates efficiently and effectively, but without generating
obscene executive salaries and bonuses and shareholder returns. Because it’s not
going to be a sustainable model. A publicly traded insurance company in the
face of climate change is not a sustainable business model for the end user, the
consumer.”38 It’s that or a disaster capitalism free-for-all; those are the choices.
These types of improvements are of course in far greater demand in
developing countries like the Philippines, Kenya, and Bangladesh that are
already facing some of the most severe climate impacts. Hundreds of billions of
dollars are urgently needed to build seawalls; storage and distribution networks
for food, water, and medicine; early warning systems and shelters for hurricanes,
cyclones, and tsunamis—as well as public health systems able to cope with
increases in climate-related diseases like malaria.39 Though mechanisms to
protect against government corruption are needed, these countries should not
have to spend their health care and education budgets on costly disaster
insurance plans purchased from transnational corporations, as is happening right
now. Their people should be receiving direct compensation from the countries
(and companies) most responsible for warming the planet.

The Polluter Pays
About now a sensible reader would be asking: how on earth are we going to pay
for all this? It’s the essential question. A 2011 survey by the U.N. Department of
Economic and Social Affairs looked at how much it would cost for humanity to
“overcome poverty, increase food production to eradicate hunger without
degrading land and water resources, and avert the climate change catastrophe.”
The price tag was $1.9 trillion a year for the next forty years—and “at least one
half of the required investments would have to be realized in developing
countries.”40

As we all know, public spending is going in the opposite direction almost
everywhere except for a handful of fast-growing so-called emerging economies.
In North America and Europe, the economic crisis that began in 2008 is still
being used as a pretext to slash aid abroad and cut climate programs at home.
All over Southern Europe, environmental policies and regulations have been
clawed back, most tragically in Spain, which, facing fierce austerity pressure,
drastically cut subsidies for renewables projects, sending solar projects and wind
farms spiraling toward default and closure. The U.K. under David Cameron has
also cut supports for renewable energy.
So if we accept that governments are broke, and they’re not likely to
introduce “quantitative easing” (aka printing money) for the climate system as
they have for the banks, where is the money supposed to come from? Since we
have only a few short years to dramatically lower our emissions, the only
rational way forward is to fully embrace the principle already well established in
Western law: the polluter pays.
The fossil fuel companies have known for decades that their core product was
warming the planet, and yet they have not only failed to adapt to that reality,
they have actively blocked progress at every turn. Meanwhile, oil and gas
companies remain some of the most profitable corporations in history, with the
top five oil companies pulling in $900 billion in profits from 2001 to 2010.
ExxonMobil still holds the record for the highest corporate profits ever reported
in the United States, earning $41 billion in 2011 and $45 billion in 2012. These
companies are rich, quite simply, because they have dumped the cost of cleaning
up their mess onto regular people around the world. It is this situation that,
most fundamentally, needs to change.41
And it will not change without strong action. For well over a decade, several
of the oil majors have claimed to be voluntarily using their profits to invest in a
shift to renewable energy. In 2000, BP rebranded itself “Beyond Petroleum” and
even changed its logo to a sunburst, called “the Helios mark after the sun god of
ancient Greece.” (“We are not an oil company,” then–chief executive Sir John
Browne said at the time, explaining that, “We are aware the world wants less
carbon-intensive fuels. What we want to do is create options.”) Chevron, for its
part, ran a high-profile advertising campaign declaring, “It’s time oil companies
get behind renewables. . . . We agree.” But according to a study by the Center
for American Progress, just 4 percent of the Big Five’s $100 billion in combined
profits in 2008 went to “renewable and alternative energy ventures.” Instead,
they continue to pour their profits into shareholder pockets, outrageous

executive pay (Exxon CEO Rex Tillerson makes more than $100,000 a day),
and new technologies designed to extract even dirtier and more dangerous fossil
fuels.42
And even as the demand for renewables increases, the percentage the fossil
fuel companies spend on them keeps shrinking—by 2011, most of the majors
were spending less than 1 percent of their overall expenditures on alternative
energy, with Chevron and Shell spending a deeply unimpressive 2.5 percent. In
2014, Chevron pulled back even further. According to Bloomberg Businessweek,
the staff of a renewables division that had almost doubled its target profits was
told “that funding for the effort would dry up” and was urged “to find jobs
elsewhere.” Chevron also moved to sell off businesses that had developed green
projects for governments and school districts. As oil industry watcher Antonia
Juhasz has observed, “You wouldn’t know it from their advertising, but the
world’s major oil companies have either entirely divested from alternative
energy or significantly reduced their investments in favor of doubling down on
ever-more risky and destructive sources of oil and natural gas.”43
Given this track record, it’s safe to assume that if fossil fuel companies are
going to help pay for the shift to renewable energy, and for the broader costs of a
climate destabilized by their pollution, it will be because they are forced to do so
by law. Just as tobacco companies have been obliged to pay the costs of helping
people to quit smoking, and BP has had to pay for much of the cleanup of its oil
spill in the Gulf of Mexico, it is high time for the industry to at least split the
bill for the climate crisis. And there is mounting evidence that the financial
world understands that this is coming. In its 2013 annual report on “Global
Risks,” the World Economic Forum (host of the annual superelite gathering in
Davos), stated plainly, “Although the Alaskan village of Kivalina—which faces
being ‘wiped out’ by the changing climate—was unsuccessful in its attempts to
file a US$ 400 million lawsuit against oil and coal companies, future plaintiffs
may be more successful. Five decades ago, the U.S. tobacco industry would not
have suspected that in 1997 it would agree to pay $368 billion in health-related
damages.” But it did.44
The question is: how do we stop fossil fuel profits from continuing to
hemorrhage into executive paychecks and shareholder pockets—and how do we
do it soon, before the companies are significantly less profitable or out of
business because we have moved to a new energy system? As the Global Risks
report suggests, communities severely impacted by climate change have made
several attempts to use the courts to sue for damages, but so far they have been

unsuccessful. A steep carbon tax would be a straightforward way to get a piece of
the profits, as long as it contained a generous redistributive mechanism—a tax
cut or income credit—that compensated poor and middle-class consumers for
increased fuel and heating prices. As Canadian economist Marc Lee points out,
designed properly, “It is possible to have a progressive carbon tax system that
reduces inequality as it raises the price of emitting greenhouse gases.”45 An even
more direct route to getting a piece of those pollution profits would be for
governments to negotiate much higher royalty rates on oil, gas, and coal
extraction, with the revenues going to “heritage trust funds” that would be
dedicated to building the post–fossil fuel future, as well as to helping
communities and workers adapt to these new realities.
Fossil fuel corporations can be counted on to resist any new rules that cut
into their profits, so harsh penalties, including revoking corporate charters,
would need to be on the table. Companies would threaten to pull out of certain
operations, to be sure, but once a multinational like Shell has spent billions to
build the mines and drilling platforms needed to extract fossil fuels, it is unlikely
to abandon that infrastructure because royalties go up. (Though it will bitterly
complain and may well seek damages at an investment tribunal.)
But the extractive industries shouldn’t be the only targets of the “polluter
pays” principle. The U.S. military is by some accounts the largest single
consumer of petroleum in the world. In 2011, the Department of Defense
released, at minimum, 56.6 million metric tons of CO2 equivalent into the
atmosphere, more than the U.S.-based operations of ExxonMobil and Shell
combined.46 So surely the arms companies should pay their share. The car
companies have plenty to answer for too, as do the shipping industry and the
airlines.
Moreover, there is a simple, direct correlation between wealth and emissions
—more money generally means more flying, driving, boating, and powering of
multiple homes. One case study of German consumers indicates that the travel
habits of the most affluent class have an impact on climate 250 percent greater
than that of their lowest-earning neighbors.47
That means any attempt to tax the extraordinary concentration of wealth at
the very top of the economic pyramid, as documented so persuasively by
Thomas Piketty among many others, would—if partially channeled into climate
financing—effectively make the polluters pay. As journalist and climate and
energy policy expert Gar Lipow puts it, “We should tax the rich more because it
is the fair thing to do, and because it will provide a better life for most of us, and

a more prosperous economy. However, providing money to save civilization and
reduce the risk of human extinction is another good reason to bill the rich for
their fair share of taxes.” But it must be said that a “polluter pays” principle
would have to reach beyond the super rich. According to Stephen Pacala,
director of the Princeton Environmental Institute and codirector of Princeton’s
Carbon Mitigation Initiative, the roughly 500 million richest of us on the planet
are responsible for about half of all global emissions. That would include the
rich in every country in the world, notably in countries like China and India, as
well significant parts of the middle classes in North America and Europe.II48
Taken together, there is no shortage of options for equitably coming up with
the cash to prepare for the coming storms while radically lowering our emissions
to prevent catastrophic warming.
Consider the following list, by no means complete:
• A “low-rate” financial transaction tax—which would hit trades of stocks,
derivatives, and other financial instruments—could bring in nearly $650
billion at the global level each year, according to a 2011 resolution of the
European Parliament (and it would have the added bonus of slowing down
financial speculation).49
• Closing tax havens would yield another windfall. The U.K.-based Tax
Justice Network estimates that in 2010, the private financial wealth of
individuals stowed unreported in tax havens around the globe was
somewhere between $21 trillion and $32 trillion. If that money were
brought into the light and its earnings taxed at a 30 percent rate, it would
yield at least $190 billion in income tax revenue each year.50
• A 1 percent “billionaire’s tax,” floated by the U.N., could raise $46 billion
annually.51
• Slashing the military budgets of each of the top ten military spenders by 25
percent could free up another $325 billion, using 2012 numbers reported by
the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. (Granted, probably
the toughest sell of all, particularly in the U.S.)52
• A $50 tax per metric ton of CO2 emitted in developed countries would
raise an estimated $450 billion annually, while a more modest $25 carbon
tax would still yield $250 billion per year, according to a 2011 report by the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), among others.53

• Phasing out fossil fuel subsidies globally would conservatively save
governments a total $775 billion in a single year, according to a 2012
estimate by Oil Change International and the Natural Resources Defense
Council.54
If these various measures were taken together, they would raise more than $2
trillion annually.55 Certainly enough for a very healthy start to finance a Great
Transition (and avoid a Great Depression). And that doesn’t count any royalty
increases on fossil fuel extraction. Of course, for any of these tax crackdowns to
work, key governments would have to coordinate their responses so that
corporations had nowhere to hide—a difficult task, though far from impossible,
and one frequently bandied about at G20 summits.
In addition to the simple fact that the money is badly needed, there are
practical political reasons why “polluter pays” should guide climate financing.
As we have seen, responding to the climate crisis can offer real benefits to a
majority of people, but real solutions will also, by definition, require short-and
medium-term sacrifices and inconveniences. And what we know from past
sacrifices made in the name of a crisis—most notably via rationing,
conservation, and price controls during both world wars—is that success
depends entirely on a perception of fairness.
In Britain and North America during World War II, for instance, every strata
of society was required to make do with less, even the very rich. And in fact,
though overall consumption in the U.K. dropped by 16 percent, caloric intake
for the poor increased during the war, because the rations provided low-income
people with more than they could otherwise afford.56
There was plenty of cheating and black market profiteering, of course, but
these programs enjoyed broad-based support because they were, at least in
theory, fair. The theme of equality pervaded government campaigns about these
wartime programs: “Fair Shares for All” was a key slogan in the U.K, while the
U.S. went with “Share and Share Alike” and “Produce, Conserve, Share and
Play Square.”57 An Office of Price Administration pamphlet from 1942 argued
that rationing was part of the American tradition. “What Is Rationing?” it
asked.
First, let’s be sure what rationing is not. It is not starvation, long bread
lines, shoddy goods. Rather, it is a community plan for dividing fairly the
supplies we have among all who need them. Second, it is not “un-

American.” The earliest settlers of this country, facing scarcities of food
and clothing, pooled their precious supplies and apportioned them out to
everyone on an equal basis. It was an American idea then, and it is an
American idea now, to share and share alike—to sacrifice, when
necessary, but sacrifice together, when the country’s welfare demands it.58
Governments also made sure that there were very public crackdowns on
wealthy and well-connected individuals who broke the rules, sending the
message that no one was exempt. In the U.K., movie stars, as well as
corporations like Woolworth and Sainsbury, faced prosecution for rations
violations. In the United States, cases were brought against some of the largest
corporations in the country. It was no secret that many large U.S. manufacturers
disliked the entire rationing system; they lobbied against it, because they
believed it eroded their brand value. Yet they were forced to accept it all the
same.59
This perception of fairness—that one set of rules applies to players big and
small—has been entirely missing from our collective responses to climate
change thus far. For decades, regular people have been asked to turn off their
lights, put on sweaters, and pay premium prices for nontoxic cleaning products
and renewable energy—and then watched as the biggest polluters have been
allowed to expand their emissions without penalty. This has been the pattern
ever since President Jimmy Carter addressed the American public in July 1979
about the fact that “too many of us now tend to worship self-indulgence and
consumption. Human identity is no longer defined by what one does, but by
what one owns.” He urged Americans “for your good and for your nation’s
security to take no unnecessary trips, to use carpools or public transportation
whenever you can, to park your car one extra day per week, to obey the speed
limit, and to set your thermostats to save fuel. Every act of energy conservation
like this is more than just common sense—I tell you it is an act of patriotism.”60
The address was initially well received but came to be derided as the
“malaise” speech and is frequently cited as one of the reasons Carter lost his
reelection bid to Ronald Reagan. And though he was not talking about climate
change but rather a broad “crisis of confidence” against a backdrop of energy
scarcity, the speech is still invoked as proof that any politician who asks voters
to sacrifice to solve an environmental crisis is on a suicide mission. Indeed this
assessment has shaped the win-win messaging of environmentalists ever since.

So it’s interesting to note that the late intellectual Christopher Lasch, who
was one of Carter’s key advisors on the infamous speech, was also one of its most
pointed critics. The author of The Culture of Narcissism had strongly urged the
president to temper his message of personal austerity with assurances of
fundamental fairness and social justice. As Lasch revealed to an interviewer
years later, he had told Carter to “put a more populist construction in his
indictment of American consumerism. . . . What was needed was a program that
called for sacrifices all right, but made it clear that the sacrifices would be
distributed in an equitable fashion.” And that, Lasch said, “would mean that
those most able to make sacrifices would be the ones on whom the sacrifices fell.
That’s what I mean by populism.”61
We cannot know if the reaction might have differed had Carter listened to
that advice and presented a plan for conservation that began with those pushing
and profiting most from wasteful consumption. We do know that responses to
climate change that continue to put the entire burden on individual consumers
are doomed to fail. For instance, the annual “British Social Attitudes” survey,
conducted by the independent NatCen Social Research, asked a set of questions
about climate policies in the year 2000, and then again in 2010. It found that,
“Whereas, 43 per cent a decade ago said they would be willing to pay higher
prices to protect the environment, this is nowadays only true of 26 per cent.
There has been a similar fall in the proportion prepared to pay higher taxes (31
to 22 per cent), but a smaller decline in relation to cuts in the standard of living
(26 per cent to 20 per cent).”62
These results, and others like them, have been cited as proof that during
times of economic hardship, people’s environmental concerns go out the
window. But that is not what these polls prove. Yes, there has been a drop in the
willingness of individuals to bear the financial burden of responding to climate
change, but not simply because economic times are hard. Western governments
have responded to these hard times—which have been created by rampant
greed and corruption among their wealthiest citizens—by asking those least
responsible for the current conditions to bear the burden. After paying for the
crisis of the bankers with cuts to education, health care, and social safety nets, is
it any wonder that a beleaguered public is in no mood to bail out the fossil fuel
companies from the crisis that they not only created but continue to actively
worsen?
Most of these surveys, notably, don’t ask respondents how they feel about
raising taxes on the rich and removing fossil fuel subsidies, yet these are some of

the most reliably popular policies around. And it’s worth noting that a U.S. poll
conducted in 2010—with the country still reeling from economic crisis—asked
voters whether they would support a plan that “would make oil and coal
companies pay for the pollution they cause. It would encourage the creation of
new jobs and new technologies in cleaner energy like wind, solar, and nuclear
power. The proposal also aims to protect working families, so it refunds almost
all of the money it collects directly to the American people, like a tax refund,
and most families end up better off.” The poll found that three quarters of
voters, including the vast majority of Republicans, supported the ideas as
outlined, and only 11 percent strongly opposed it. The plan was similar to a
proposal, known as “cap and dividend,” being floated by a pair of senators at the
time, but it was never seriously considered by the U.S. Senate.63
And when, in June 2014, Obama finally introduced plans to use the
Environmental Protection Agency to limit greenhouse gas emissions from
existing power plants, the coal lobby howled with indignation but public
opinion was solidly supportive. According to one poll, 64 percent of Americans,
including a great many Republicans, backed such a policy even though it would
likely mean paying more for energy every month.64
The lesson from all this is not that people won’t sacrifice in the face of the
climate crisis. It’s that they have had it with our culture of lopsided sacrifice, in
which individuals are asked to pay higher prices for supposedly green choices
while large corporations dodge regulation and not only refuse to change their
behavior, but charge ahead with ever more polluting activities. Witnessing this,
it is perfectly sensible for people to shed much of the keener enthusiasm that
marked the early days of the climate movement, and to make it clear that no
more sacrifice will be made until the policy solutions on the table are perceived
as just. This does not mean the middle class is off the hook. To fund the kind of
social programs that will make a just transition possible, taxes will have to rise
for everyone but the poor. But if the funds raised go toward social programs and
services that reduce inequality and make lives far less insecure and precarious,
then public attitudes toward taxation would very likely shift as well.
To state the obvious: it would be incredibly difficult to persuade governments in
almost every country in the world to implement the kinds of redistributive
climate mechanisms I have outlined. But we should be clear about the nature of
the challenge: it is not that “we” are broke or that we lack options. It is that our

political class is utterly unwilling to go where the money is (unless it’s for a
campaign contribution), and the corporate class is dead set against paying its fair
share.
Seen in this light, it’s hardly surprising that our leaders have so far failed to
act to avert climate chaos. Indeed even if aggressive “polluter pays” measures
were introduced, it isn’t at all clear that the current political class would know
what to do with the money. After all, changing the building blocks of our
societies—the energy that powers our economies, how we move around, the
designs of our major cities—is not about writing a few checks. It requires bold
long-term planning at every level of government, and a willingness to stand up
to polluters whose actions put us all in danger. And that won’t happen until the
corporate liberation project that has shaped our political culture for three and a
half decades is buried for good.
Just as the climate change deniers I met at the Heartland Institute fear, there
is a direct relationship between breaking fossilized free market rules and making
swift progress on climate change. Which is why, if we are to collectively meet
the enormous challenges of this crisis, a robust social movement will need to
demand (and create) political leadership that is not only committed to making
polluters pay for a climate-ready public sphere, but willing to revive two lost
arts: long-term public planning, and saying no to powerful corporations.

I. This was the situation not only in the Rockaways but seemingly wherever public housing was in the
path of the storm. In Red Hook, Brooklyn, many residents were left without power for three weeks, during
which time the Housing Authority never went systematically door-to-door. As sixty-year-old Wally
Bazemore put it at an angry residents meeting: “We were literally in the dark and we were completely in
the dark.”
II. This is why the persistent positing of population control as a solution to climate change is a
distraction and moral dead end. As this research makes clear, the most significant cause of rising emissions
is not the reproductive behavior of the poor but the consumer behaviors of the rich.

4

PLANNING AND BANNING
Slapping the Invisible Hand, Building a Movement
“Post-modernism has cut off the present from all futures. The daily media adds to this by
cutting off the past. Which means that critical opinion is often orphaned in the present.”
—John Berger, Keeping a Rendezvous, 19911

“A reliably green company is one that is required to be green by law.”
—Gus Speth, former dean of the Yale School of Forestry and Environmental Studies, 20082

To understand how free market ideology continues to suffocate the potential for
climate action, it’s useful to look back on the most recent moment when
transformative change of the scope required actually seemed like a real
possibility, even in the United States. That time was 2009, the peak of the
world financial crisis and the first year of the Obama presidency.
Hindsight is easy, granted, but bear with me: imagining what might have
been can help clarify what the future might still create.
This was a moment when history was unfolding in fast-forward, when almost
anything seemed possible, for better and worse. A large part of what made better
scenarios seem possible was the decisive democratic mandate that Obama had
just earned. He had been elected on a platform promising to rebuild the “Main
Street” economy and to treat climate change as, in his words, “an opportunity,
because if we create a new energy economy, we can create five million new
jobs. . . . It can be an engine that drives us into the future the same way the
computer was the engine for economic growth over the last couple of decades.”3
Both the fossil fuel companies and the environmental movement took it as a

given that the new president would introduce a bold piece of climate legislation
early in his presidency.
The financial crisis, meanwhile, had just shattered public faith in laissez-faire
economics around the world—so much so that there was tremendous support
even in the U.S. for breaking long-standing ideological taboos against
intervening directly in the market to create good jobs. That gave Obama the
leverage to design a stimulus program worth about $800 billion (and he
probably could have asked for more) to get the economy moving again.
The other extraordinary factor in this moment was the weak state of the
banks: in 2009, they were still on their knees, dependent on trillions in bailout
funds and loan guarantees. And there was a live debate unfolding about how
those banks should be restructured in exchange for all that taxpayer generosity
(there was even serious discussion of nationalization). The other factor worth
remembering is that starting in 2008, two of the Big Three automakers—
companies at the very heart of the fossil fuel economy—had so badly
mismanaged their affairs that they too had landed in the hands of the
government, which had been tasked with securing their viability.
All told, three huge economic engines—the banks, the auto companies, and
the stimulus bill—were in a state of play, placing more economic power in the
hands of Obama and his party than any U.S. government since the
administration of Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Imagine, for a moment, if his
administration had been willing to invoke its newly minted democratic mandate
to build the new economy promised on the campaign trail—to treat the
stimulus bill, the broken banks, and the shattered car companies as the building
blocks of that green future. Imagine if there had been a powerful social
movement—a robust coalition of trade unions, immigrants, students,
environmentalists, and everyone else whose dreams were getting crushed by the
crashing economic model—demanding that Obama do no less.
The stimulus package could have been used to build the best public transit
systems and smart grids in the world. The auto industry could have been
dramatically reengineered so that its factories built the machinery to power that
transition—not just a few token electric cars (though those too) but also vast
streetcar and high-speed rail systems across an underserved nation. Just as a
shuttered auto parts factory in Ontario had reopened as the Silfab solar plant,
similar transitions could have been made in closed and closing factories across
the continent. This transformation was proposed at the time by one of the most
important intellectuals of the North American labor movement, Sam Gindin,

who served for many years as research director for the Canadian Auto Workers
Union:
If we are serious about incorporating environmental needs into the
economy, this means changing everything about how we produce and
consume and how we travel and live. The potential work to be done in
this regard—in the tool and die shops that are closing, the component
plants that have the capacity to make more than a specific component,
and by a workforce anxious to do useful work—is limitless.
The equipment and skills can be used to not only build different cars,
and different car components, but to expand public transit and develop
new transportation systems. They can participate in altering, in line with
environmental demands, the machinery in every workplace and the
motors that run the machinery. They can be applied to new systems of
production that recycle used materials and final products (such as cars).
Homes will have to be retrofitted and appliances modified. The use of
solar panels and wind turbines will spread, new electricity grids will have
to be developed, and urban infrastructure will have to be reinvented to
accommodate the changes in transportation and energy use.
What better time to launch such a project than now, in the face of
having to overcome both the immediate economic crisis and the looming
environmental crisis? And what greater opportunity to insist that we
cannot lose valuable facilities and equipment, nor squander the creativity,
knowledge and abilities of engineers, skilled trades and production
workers?4
Retrofitting factories on that scale is expensive, to be sure, and that’s where
the bailed-out banks could have come in. A government unafraid to use its
newfound power could have used the leverage it had over the banks (having just
pulled them from the precipice) to enlist them—kicking and screaming if
necessary—in this great transformation. As every banker knows, when you loan
someone money, you acquire a fair bit of power over them. Does a factory need
some capital to make the transition from dirty to clean? If it has a credible
business plan, especially one that supports the stimulus vision, then the bailedout banks could have been mandated by the state as part of the bailout to give
that factory a loan. If one refused, it could have been nationalized, as several
major banks were around the world in the period.

Many of the previous factory owners would not have been interested in
sticking around for this kind of transition, since the profit margins, at least at
first, would have been small. But that is no reason to allow useful machines to
be sold off as scrap. The workers at these plants, as Gindin suggested, could have
been given the chance to run their old factories as cooperatives, as happened in
several hundred abandoned factories in Argentina after that country’s economic
crisis in 2001. I lived in Buenos Aires for two years while making a documentary
film about those factories, called The Take. One of the stories we told was about
a group of workers who took over their shuttered auto-parts plant and turned it
into a thriving co-op. It was a highly emotional journey, as workers took big
risks and discovered new skills they had not known they possessed. And over a
decade later, we still receive reports about how well things are going at the
factory. Most of Argentina’s “recovered factories”—as the hundreds of workerrun co-ops are called—are still in production, churning out everything from
kitchen tiles to men’s suits.I This decentralized ownership model has the added
benefit of pushing against the trend toward utterly unsustainable wealth
inequality; rather than simply propping up the current global system in which
eighty-five people control as much wealth as half the world’s population, the
ability to create wealth is gradually dispersed to the workers themselves, and the
communities sustained by the presence of well-paying jobs.5
If that kind of coherent and sweeping vision had emerged in the United
States in that moment of flux as the Obama presidency began, right-wing
attempts to paint climate action as an economy killer would have fallen flat. It
would have been clear to all that climate action is, in fact, a massive job creator,
as well as a community rebuilder, and a source of hope in moments when hope
is a scarce commodity indeed. But all of this would have required a government
that was unafraid of bold longterm economic planning, as well as social
movements that were able to move masses of people to demand the realization
of that kind of vision. (The mainstream climate organizations in the U.S., in
this crucial period, were instead narrowly focused on a failed attempt to get a
piece of carbon-trading energy legislation through Congress, not on helping to
build a broad movement.)
In the absence of those factors, that rarest of historical moments—so
pregnant with potential—slipped away. Obama let the failed banks do what
they liked, despite the fact that their gross mismanagement had put the entire
economy at risk. The fundamentals of the car industry were also left intact, with

little more than a fresh wave of downsizing to show for the crisis. The industry
lost nearly 115,000 manufacturing jobs between 2008 and 2014.6
To be fair, there was significant support for wind and solar and for green
initiatives like energy efficient building upgrades in the stimulus bill; without
question, as journalist Michael Grunwald shows in The New New Deal, the
funding amounted to “the biggest and most transformative energy bill in U.S.
history.” But public transit was still inexplicably shortchanged and the biggest
infrastructure winner was the national highway system, precisely the wrong
direction from a climate perspective. This failure was not only Obama’s; as
University of Leeds ecological economist Julia Steinberger observes, it was
global. The financial crisis that began in 2008 “should have been an opportunity
to invest in low-carbon infrastructure for the 21st century. Instead, we fostered a
lose-lose situation: carbon emissions rocketing to unprecedented levels,
alongside increases in joblessness, energy costs, and income disparities.”7
What stopped Obama from seizing his historical moment to stabilize the
economy and the climate at the same time was not lack of resources, or a lack of
power. He had plenty of both. What stopped him was the invisible confinement
of a powerful ideology that had convinced him—as it has convinced virtually all
of his political counterparts—that there is something wrong with telling large
corporations how to run their businesses even when they are running them into
the ground, and that there is something sinister, indeed vaguely communist,
about having a plan to build the kind of economy we need, even in the face of
an existential crisis.
This is, of course, yet another legacy bequeathed to us by the free market
counterrevolution. As recently as the early 1970s, a Republican president—
Richard Nixon—was willing to impose wage and price controls to rescue the
U.S. economy from crisis, popularizing the notion that “We are all Keynesians
now.”8 But by the 1980s, the battle of ideas waged out of the same Washington
think tanks that now deny climate change had successfully managed to equate
the very idea of industrial planning with Stalin’s five-year plans. Real capitalists
don’t plan, these ideological warriors insisted—they unleash the power of the
profit motive and let the market, in its infinite wisdom, create the best possible
society for all.
Obama, obviously, does not share this extreme vision: as his health care and
other social policies suggest, he believes government should nudge business in
the right direction. And yet he is still sufficiently a product of his anti-planning
era that when he had the banks, the auto companies, and the stimulus in his

hands, he saw them as burdens to be rid of as soon as possible, rather than as a
rare chance to build an exciting new future.
If there is a lesson in this tremendous missed opportunity, it is this: if we are
going to see climate action of the scale and speed required, the left is going to
have to quickly learn from the right. Conservatives have managed to stall and
roll back climate action amidst economic crisis by making climate about
economics—about the pressing need to protect growth and jobs during difficult
times (and they are always difficult). Progressives can easily do the same: by
showing that the real solutions to the climate crisis are also our best hope of
building a much more stable and equitable economic system, one that
strengthens and transforms the public sphere, generates plentiful, dignified
work, and radically reins in corporate greed.
But before that can happen, it’s clear that a core battle of ideas must be
fought about the right of citizens to democratically determine what kind of
economy they need. Policies that simply try to harness the power of the market
—by minimally taxing or capping carbon and then getting out of the way—
won’t be enough. If we are to rise to a challenge that involves altering the very
foundation of our economy, we will need every policy tool in the democratic
arsenal.

Planning for Jobs
Some policymakers already understand this, which is why so many of the
climate disputes being dragged in front of WTO tribunals hinge on attempts by
governments, whether in Ontario or India, to reintroduce some measure of
industrial planning to their economies. These governments are saying to
industry: we will support you, but only if you support the communities from
which you profit, by providing well-paying local jobs, and sourcing your
products locally.
The reason governments turn to buy-local or hire-local policies such as these
is because they make political sense. Any response to the climate crisis that has
a chance of success will create not just winners but also a significant number of
losers—industries that can no longer exist in their current form and workers
whose jobs will disappear. There is little hope of bringing the fossil fuel
companies onside to a green transition; the profits they stand to lose are simply

too great. That is not the case, however, for the workers whose salaries are
currently tied to fossil fuel extraction and combustion.
What we know is this: trade unions can be counted on to fiercely protect
jobs, however dirty, if these are the only jobs on offer. On the other hand, when
workers in dirty sectors are offered good jobs in clean sectors (like the former
autoworkers at the Silfab factory in Toronto), and are enlisted as active
participants in a green transition, then progress can happen at lightning speed.
The potential job creation is huge. For instance, a plan put forward by the
U.S. BlueGreen Alliance, a body that brings together unions and
environmentalists, estimated that a $40 billion annual investment in public
transit and high-speed rail for six years would produce more than 3.7 million
jobs during that period. And we know that investments in public transit pay off:
a 2011 study by research and policy organization Smart Growth America found
they create 31 percent more jobs per dollar than investment in new road and
bridge construction. Investing in the maintenance and repair of roads and
bridges creates 16 percent more jobs per dollar than investment in new road and
bridge construction.9 All of which means that making existing transportation
infrastructure work better for more people is a smarter investment from both a
climate and an economic perspective than covering more land with asphalt.
Renewable energy is equally promising, in part because it creates more jobs
per unit of energy delivered than fossil fuels. In 2012, the International Labour
Organization estimated that about five million jobs had already been created in
the sector worldwide—and that is with only the most scattershot and
inadequate levels of government commitment to emission reduction.10 If
industrial policy were brought in line with climate science, the supply of energy
through wind, solar, and other forms of renewable energy (geothermal and tidal
power, for example) would generate huge numbers of jobs in every country—in
manufacturing, construction, installation, maintenance, and operation.
Similar research in Canada has found that an investment of $1.3 billion (the
amount the Canadian government spends on subsidies to oil and gas companies)
could create seventeen to twenty thousand jobs in renewable energy, public
transit, or energy efficiency—six to eight times as many jobs as that money
generates in the oil and gas sector. And according to a 2011 report for the
European Transport Workers Federation, comprehensive policies to reduce
emissions in the transport sector by 80 percent would create seven million new
jobs across the continent, while another five million clean energy jobs in Europe
could slash electricity emissions by 90 percent. A bold coalition in South

Africa, meanwhile, going under the banner of One Million Climate Jobs, is
calling for mass job creation programs in areas ranging from renewable energy to
public transit to ecosystem restoration to small-scale sustainable farming. “By
placing the interests of workers and the poor at the forefront of strategies to
combat climate change we can simultaneously halt climate change and address
our jobs bloodbath,” the campaign states.11
These are not, however, the kinds of jobs that the market will create on its
own. They will be created on this scale only by thoughtful policy and planning.
And in some cases, having the tools to make those plans will require citizens
doing what the residents of so many German cities and towns have done: taking
back control over electricity generation so that the switch to renewables can be
made without delay, while any profits generated go not to shareholders but back
into supporting hungry public services.
And it’s not only power generation that should receive this treatment. If the
private companies that took over the national railways are cutting back and
eroding services at a time when the climate crisis demands expanded low-carbon
transportation alternatives to keep more of us out of planes, then these services
too must be reclaimed. And after more than two decades of hard experience
with privatizations—which has too often involved diminished services
combined with higher prices—a great many people are ready to consider that
option. For instance, a British poll released in November 2013 found “voters of
all politics united in their support for nationalisation of energy and rail. 68 per
cent of the public say the energy companies should be run in the public sector,
while only 21 per cent say they should remain in private hands. 66 per cent
support nationalising the railway companies while 23 per cent think they should
be run privately.” One of the most surprising aspects of the poll was the amount
of support for nationalization among self-described Conservative voters: 52
percent favored taking back both the energy companies and the rails.12

Planning for Power
The climate case for rethinking private ownership is particularly strong when it
comes to natural gas, which is currently being touted by many governments as a
“bridge fuel.” The theory is that, in the time it takes for us to make a full switch
to zero carbon sources of energy, gas can serve as an alternative to dirtier fossil
fuels like coal and oil. It is far from clear that this bridge is necessary, given the

speed of the shift to renewables in countries like Germany. And there are many
problems, as we will see, with the whole idea of natural gas being clean. But
from a planning perspective, the most immediate problem is that for the bridge
concept to work, ways would have to be found to ensure that natural gas was
being used only as a replacement for coal and oil—and not to undercut
renewable energy. And this is a very real concern: in the U.S., the deluge of
cheap natural gas thanks to fracking has already hurt the country’s wind market,
with wind power’s share of the new electricity coming online plummeting from
at least 42 percent in 2009 to 25 percent in 2010 and 32 percent in 2011—the
key years that fracking skyrocketed.13 Moreover, once the “bridge” to a
renewable future has been built, there would have to be a way to phase out gas
extraction completely, since it is a major emitter of greenhouse gases.
There are various ways to design a system that would meet these specific
goals. Governments could mandate “combined-cycle” plants that are better at
ramping up and down to support wind and solar when available, for example,
and they could firmly link any new gas plants to coal plants taken off the grid.
Also crucial, says the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives’ Ben Parfitt, an
expert on fracking impacts, would be “regulations in place at the state and the
national levels that made the link between where the gas is being produced and
how it is being produced, and the ultimate production of the power,” meaning
that power plants could only source gas that was proven to have lower life-cycle
emissions than coal.14 And that could well rule out fracked gas completely.
Barriers would also need to be placed on the ability of companies to export their
gas, in order to prevent it from being burned in countries that place no such
restrictions. These measures would limit many, though by no means all, of the
risks associated with natural gas, but they would also seriously eat into the
profitability of the sector.
Which raises the question: why would notoriously ruthless for-profit
companies accept a business model that relies on them not competing with large
parts of the energy sector (wind and solar), requires that they submit to a huge
range of costly regulation, all with the eventual goal of putting themselves out
of business? The answer is that they would not. Treating natural gas as a truly
temporary transition fuel is anathema to the profit-seeking imperative that
drives these corporations. After all, who is doing the fracking? It’s companies
like BP and Chevron, with their long track records of safety violations and
fending off tough regulation. These are companies whose business model
requires that they replace the oil and gas they have in production with new

reserves of fossil fuels or face a shareholder rebellion. That same growth-aboveall model demands that they occupy as much of the energy market as possible—
which means competing not just with coal but with every player in the energy
market, including vulnerable renewables. To quote John Browne when he was
chief executive of BP (he now heads the gas giant Cuadrilla): “Corporations
have to be responsive to price signals. We are not public service.”15 True
enough—but that was neither always the case with our energy companies, nor
must it remain so.
The bottom line is simple. No private company in the world wants to put
itself out of business; its goal is to expand its market. Which is why, if natural
gas is to serve as a short-term transition fuel, that transition must be tightly
managed by—and for—the public, so that the profits from current sales are
reinvested in renewable technologies for the future, and the sector is
constrained from indulging in the kind of exponential growth it is currently
enjoying amidst the shale gas boom.16
The solution is most emphatically not energy nationalization on existing
models. The big publicly owned oil companies—from Brazil’s Petrobras to
Norway’s Statoil to PetroChina—are just as voracious in pursuing high-risk
pools of carbon as their private sector counterparts.17 And in the absence of a
credible transition plan to harness the profits for a switch to renewable energy,
having the state as the major shareholder in these companies has profoundly
corrupting effects, creating an addiction to easy petrodollars that makes it even
less likely that policymakers will introduce measures that hurt fossil fuel profits
in any way. In short, these centralized monsters are fossils in every sense of the
word, and need to be broken up and phased out whether they are held in public
or private hands.
A better model would be a new kind of utility—run democratically, by the
communities that use them, as co-ops or as a “commons,” as author and activist
David Bollier and others have outlined.18 This kind of structure would enable
citizens to demand far more from their energy companies than they are able to
now—for example, that they direct their profits away from new fossil fuel
exploration and obscene executive compensation and shareholder returns and
into building the network of complementary renewables that we now know has
the potential to power our economies in our lifetimes.
The rapid rise of renewables in Germany makes a powerful case for this
model. The transition has occurred, first of all, within the context of a sweeping,
national feed-in tariff program that includes a mix of incentives designed to

ensure that anyone who wants to get into renewable power generation can do so
in a way that is simple, stable, and profitable. Providers are guaranteed priority
access to the grid, and offered a guaranteed price so the risk of losing money is
low.
This has encouraged small, noncorporate players to become renewable energy
providers—farms, municipalities, and hundreds of newly formed co-ops. That
has decentralized not just electrical power, but also political power and wealth:
roughly half of Germany’s renewable energy facilities are in the hands of
farmers, citizen groups, and almost nine hundred energy cooperatives. Not only
are they generating power but they also have the chance to generate revenue for
their communities by selling back to the grid. Over all, there are now 1.4
million photovoltaic installations and about 25,000 windmills. Nearly 400,000
jobs have been created.19
Each one of these measures represents a departure from neoliberal orthodoxy:
the government is engaging in longterm national planning; it is deliberately
picking winners in the market (renewables over nuclear power, which it is
simultaneously closing down); it is fixing prices (a clear market interference);
and creating a fair playing field for any potential renewable energy producer—
big or small—to enter the market. And yet despite—or rather because of—these
ideological heresies, Germany’s transition is among the fastest in the world.
According to Hans Thie, the advisor on economic policy for the Left Party in
the German parliament, who has been intensely involved in the transition,
“Virtually all expansion estimates have been surpassed. The speed of expansion
is considerably higher than had been expected.”20
Nor can this success be dismissed as a one-off. Germany’s program mirrors
one implemented in Denmark in the 1970s and 1980s, which helped switch
more than 40 percent of the country’s electricity consumption to renewables,
mostly wind. Up to around 2000, roughly 85 percent of Danish wind turbines
were owned by small players like farmers and co-ops. Though large offshore
wind operators have entered the market in recent years, this remains a striking
commonality between Denmark and Germany: it’s neither big nationally owned
monopolies nor large corporate-owned wind and solar operators that have the
best track record for spurring renewable energy turnarounds—it’s communities,
co-ops, and farmers, working within the context of an ambitious, well-designed
national framework.21 Though often derided as the impractical fantasy of smallis-beautiful dreamers, decentralization delivers, and not on a small scale but on

the largest scale of any model attempted thus far, and in highly developed
postindustrial nations.
It is also surely no coincidence that Denmark, a deeply social democratic
country, introduced these policies well before it began its halfhearted embrace
of neoliberalism, or that Germany—while prescribing brutal austerity to debtor
countries like Greece and Spain—has never fully followed these prescriptions at
home. These examples make clear that when governments are willing to
introduce bold programs and put goals other than profit making at the forefront
of their policymaking, change can happen with astonishing speed.
Decentralized control over energy is also important for very practical reasons.
There are plenty of examples of large-scale, privately owned renewable energy
projects that fell apart because they were imposed from the outside without local
input or profit sharing. Indeed, when communities are excluded in this way,
there is a very good chance that they will rebel against the noise and
“unsightliness” of wind turbines, or the threats—some real, some imagined—to
wildlife and ecosystems posed by solar arrays. These objections are often
dismissed as NIMBY-ism (Not in My Backyard) and are used as more evidence
of humanity’s tendency toward selfishness and shortsightedness.
But in several regions, these objections have been entirely neutralized with
thoughtful planning. As Preben Maegaard, former president of the World Wind
Energy Association, once put it, “When local people own the wind farms, and
share in the benefits, they will support them. It won’t be NIMBY (Not In My
Back Yard), it will be POOL (Please On Our Land).”22
This is particularly true in times of unending public austerity. “The future is
something that is not relevant at the moment for some people because they’re
surviving for the present,” Dimitra Spatharidou, a Greek climate change activist
engaged in that country’s broader anti-austerity movement, told me. “It’s
difficult to understand the concept of sustainability when people are fighting for
food and to have energy to heat their homes.” Because of these pressing
concerns, her work is “not about preaching about what happens when climate
change hits Greece, it’s about what’s happening now and how we can change
our economies and our societies into something better, to something more
equitable and to something fair.”23 For Spatharidou, that has meant showing
how community-controlled renewable energy can be cheaper than dirtier
alternatives, and can even be a source of income when energy is fed back into
the grid. It has also meant resisting a government push to privatize municipal
water supplies, pushing instead for community ownership, an idea with broad

support in Greece. The key, she says, is to offer people something the current
system doesn’t: the tools and the power to build a better life for themselves.
This relationship between power decentralization and successful climate
action points to how the planning required by this moment differs markedly
from the more centralized versions of the past. There is a reason, after all, why it
was so easy for the right to vilify state enterprises and national planning: many
state-owned companies were bureaucratic, cumbersome, and unresponsive; the
five-year plans cooked up under state socialist governments were indeed topdown and remote, utterly disconnected from local needs and experiences, just as
the plans issued by the Communist Party of China’s Central Committee are
today.
The climate planning we need is of a different sort entirely. There is a clear
and essential role for national plans and policies—to set overall emission targets
that keep each country safely within its carbon budget, and to introduce policies
like the feed-in tariffs employed in Germany, Ontario, and elsewhere, that make
renewable energy affordable. Some programs, like national energy grids and
effective rail services, must be planned, at least in part, at the national level. But
if these transitions are to happen as quickly as required, then the best way to
win widespread buy-in is for the actual implementation of a great many of the
plans to be as decentralized as possible. Communities should be given new tools
and powers to design the methods that work best for them—much as worker-run
co-ops have the capacity to play a huge role in an industrial transformation.
And what is true for energy and manufacturing can be true for many other
sectors: transit systems accountable to their riders, water systems overseen by
their users, neighborhoods planned democratically by their residents, and so on.
Most critically, farming—a major source of greenhouse gas emissions—can
also become an expanded sector of decentralized self-sufficiency and poverty
reduction, as well as a key tool for emission reduction. Currently, much of the
debate about agriculture and climate change focuses on contrasting the pros and
cons of industrial agriculture versus local and organic farming, with one side
emphasizing higher yields and the other emphasizing lower chemical inputs and
often (though not always) shorter supply lines. Coming up through the middle is
“agroecology,” a less understood practice in which small-scale farmers use
sustainable methods based on a combination of modern science and local
knowledge.
Based on the principle that farming should maximize species diversity and
enhance natural systems of soil protection and pest control, agroecology looks

different wherever its holistic techniques are practiced. But a report in National
Geographic provides a helpful overview of how these principles translate in a few
different contexts: the integration of “trees and shrubs into crop and livestock
fields; solar-powered drip irrigation, which delivers water directly to plant roots;
intercropping, which involves planting two or more crops near each other to
maximize the use of light, water, and nutrients; and the use of green manures,
which are quick-growing plants that help prevent erosion and replace nutrients
in the soil.”24
These methods and many others maintain healthy soil while producing
nutritious food—more than industrial agriculture does, per unit area—and limit
the need for farmers to buy expensive products like chemical pesticides,
fertilizers, and patented seeds. But many farmers who have long used these
methods have realized that they also have a triple climate benefit: they sequester
carbon in the soil, avoid fossil fuel–based fertilizers, and often use less carbon for
transportation to market, in addition to better withstanding extreme weather
and other climate impacts. And communities that can feed themselves are far
less vulnerable to price shocks within the broader globalized food system. Which
is why La Via Campesina, a global network of small farmers with 200 million
members, often declares, “Agroecology is the solution to solve the climate
crisis.” Or “small farmers cool the planet.”25
In recent years, a phalanx of high-level food experts has come to similar
conclusions. “A large segment of the scientific community now acknowledges
the positive impacts of agroecology on food production, poverty alleviation and
climate change mitigation—and this is what is needed in a world of limited
resources,” says Olivier De Schutter, who served as the UN Special Rapporteur
on the Right to Food from 2008 to 2014.26
Just as they dismiss decentralized energy as too small, defenders of Big
Agribusiness maintain that local organic agriculture simply cannot feed a world
of 7 billion and growing—but those claims are generally based on comparisons
between yields from industrial, often genetically engineered monocrops, and
organic monocrops. Agroecology is left out of the picture. That’s a problem
because as De Schutter notes, “Today’s scientific evidence demonstrates that
agroecological methods outperform the use of chemical fertilizers in boosting
food production where the hungry live—especially in unfavorable
environments.” He cites the example of Malawi, where a recent turn to
agroecology has led to a doubling or tripling of maize yields in some areas, and
adds that “to date, agroecological projects have shown an average crop yield

increase of 80% in 57 developing countries, with an average increase of 116%
for all African projects. Recent projects conducted in 20 African countries
demonstrated a doubling of crop yields over a period of 3–10 years.”27
All this amounts to a compelling case against the claim, frequently voiced by
powerful philanthropists like Bill Gates, that the developing world, particularly
Africa, needs a “New Green Revolution”—a reference to philanthropic and
government efforts in the mid-twentieth century to introduce industrial
agriculture in Asia and Latin America. “It’s often claimed, particularly by those
who’d like to see it rebooted, that the Green Revolution saved the world from
hunger,” sociologist Raj Patel, author of Stuffed and Starved, told me. “The
problem is that even with the Green Revolution, starvation continues—
particularly in India, where the revolution was most intense. Hunger isn’t about
the amount of food around—it’s about being able to afford and control that
food. After all, the U.S. has more food than it knows what to do with, and still
50 million people are food insecure.”28
And he adds, “The tragedy here is that there are thousands of successful
experiments, worldwide, showing how climate-smart agriculture can work.
They’re characterized not by expensive fertilizer from Yara and proprietary seeds
from Monsanto, but knowledge developed and shared by peasants freely and
equitably.” And, Patel says, “In its finest moments, agroecology gets combined
with ‘food sovereignty,’ with democratic control of the food system, so that not
only is more food produced, but it’s distributed so that everyone gets to eat it
too.”29

About That German Miracle . . .
We now have a few models to point to that demonstrate how to get far-reaching
decentralized climate solutions off the ground with remarkable speed, while
fighting poverty, hunger, and joblessness at the same time. But it’s also clear
that, however robust, these tools and incentives are not enough to lower
emissions in time. And this brings us to what has most definitely not worked
about the German energy transition.
In 2012—with its renewable sector soaring to new heights—German
emissions actually went up from the previous year. Preliminary data suggest that
the same thing happened in 2013. The country’s emissions are still 24 percent
below what they were in 1990, so these two years may turn out to have been a

short-term blip, but the fact that the dramatic rise of renewables is not
corresponding to an equally dramatic drop in greenhouse gas emissions is cause
for great concern.30 It also tells us something critical about the limits of
economic plans based on incentives and market mechanisms alone.
Many have attributed the emissions rise to Germany’s decision to phase out
nuclear power, but the facts are not nearly so simple. It’s true that in 2011, in
the wake of the Fukushima disaster, the government of Chancellor Angela
Merkel—under intense pressure from the country’s powerful antinuclear
movement—announced that it would phase out nuclear power by 2022, and
took aggressive action to begin the process. But at the same time, the
government took no similar action to phase out coal and even allowed coal
companies to export power to other countries. So even though Germans have
indeed been moving in ever greater numbers to renewable energy, coal power
continued to grow, with some of it displacing nuclear power, some of it
displacing gas, and some of it being exported. And much of the coal in Germany
is lignite, often referred to as brown coal, a low-grade variety with particularly
high emissions.31
As we have already seen, the latest research on renewable energy, most
notably by Mark Jacobson’s team at Stanford, shows that a global transition to
100 percent renewable energy—“wind, water and solar”—is both technically
and economically feasible “by as early as 2030.” That means lowering
greenhouse emissions in line with science-based targets does not have to involve
building a global network of new nuclear plants. In fact that could well slow
down the transition, since renewable energy is faster and cheaper to roll out
than nuclear, critical factors given the tightness of the timeframe. Moreover,
says Jacobson, in the near-term nuclear is “not carbon-free, no matter what the
advocates tell you. Vast amounts of fossil fuels must be burned to mine,
transport and enrich uranium and to build the nuclear plant. And all that dirty
power will be released during the 10 to 19 years that it takes to plan and build a
nuclear plant. (A wind farm typically takes two to five years.)” He concludes
that “if we invest in nuclear versus true renewables, you can bet that the glaciers
and polar ice caps will keep melting while we wait, and wait, for the nuclear age
to arrive. We will also guarantee a riskier future for us all.” Indeed, renewable
installations present dramatically lower risks than either fossil fuels or nuclear
energy to those who live and work next to them. As comedian Bill Maher once
observed, “You know what happens when windmills collapse into the sea? A
splash.”II32

That said, about 12 percent of the world’s power is currently supplied by
nuclear energy, much of it coming from reactors that are old and obsolete.33
From a climate perspective, it would certainly be preferable if governments
staggered their transitions away from high-risk energy sources like nuclear,
prioritizing fossil fuels for cuts because the next decade is so critical for getting
us off our current trajectory toward 4–6 degrees Celsius of warming. That would
be compatible with a moratorium on new nuclear facilities, a decommissioning
of the oldest plants and then a full nuclear phase-out once renewables had
decisively displaced fossil fuels.
And yet it must also be acknowledged that it was the power of Germany’s
antinuclear movement that created the conditions for the renewables revolution
in the first place (as was the case in Denmark in the 1980s), so there might have
been no energy transition to debate without that widespread desire to get off
nuclear due to its many hazards. Moreover, many German energy experts are
convinced that the speed of the transition so far proves that it is possible to
phase out both nuclear and fossil fuels simultaneously. A 2012 report by the
German National Center for Aerospace, Energy and Transport Research (DLR),
for instance, demonstrated that 67 percent of the electicity in all of the EU
could come from renewables by 2030, with that number reaching 96 percent by
2050.34 But, clearly, this will become a reality only if the right policies are in
place.
For that to happen, the German government would have to be willing to do
to the coal industry what it has been willing to do to the nuclear power industry:
introduce specific, top-down regulations to phase it out. Instead, because of the
vast political power of the German coal lobby, the Merkel government has
relied on the weak market mechanism of carbon trading, through the European
emissions trading system, to try to put negative pressure on coal.35 When the
European carbon market fell apart, and the price of carbon plummeted, this
strategy proved disastrous. Coal was cheap, there was no real penalty to burning
it, and there were no blocks on exporting coal power, and so key years that
should have been triumphs over pollution became setbacks.
Tadzio Mueller, a Berlin-based researcher and climate expert, put the
problem to me like this: “German emissions are not up because nuclear power is
down. They’re up because nobody told the German power companies not to
burn coal, and as long as they can profitably sell the electricity somewhere,
they’ll burn the coal—even if most electricity consumed in Germany was

renewable. What we need are strict rules against the extraction and burning of
coal. Period.”36
It is critical for governments to put creative incentives in place so that
communities around the world have tools to say yes to renewable energy. But
what the German experience shows is that all that progress will be put at risk
unless policymakers are willing simultaneously to say no to the ever rapacious
fossil fuel industry.

Remembering How to Say No
Even before I saw the giant mines, when the landscape out the window was still
bright green boggy marshes and lush boreal forest, I could feel them—a catch in
the back of my throat. Then, up and over a small elevation, there they were: the
notorious Alberta tar sands, a parched, gray desert stretching to the horizon.
Mountains of waste so large workers joke that they have their own weather
systems. Tailing ponds so vast they are visible from space. The second largest
dam in the world, built to contain that toxic water. The earth, skinned alive.
Science fiction is rife with fantasies of terraforming—humans traveling to
lifeless planets and engineering them into earthlike habitats. The Canadian tar
sands are the opposite: terra-deforming. Taking a habitable ecosystem, filled
with life, and engineering it into a moonscape where almost nothing can live.
And if this goes on, it could impact an area roughly the size of England. All to
access a semisolid form of “unconventional” oil known as bitumen that is so
difficult and energy-intensive to extract that the process is roughly three to four
times as greenhouse gas intensive as extracting conventional oil.37
In June 2011, I cosigned a letter drafted by author and climate activist Bill
McKibben that called on people to come to Washington, D.C., “in the hottest
and stickiest weeks of the summer” to get arrested protesting the proposed
Keystone XL pipeline. Amazingly, more than 1,200 people did just that, making
it the largest act of civil disobedience in the history of the North American
climate movement.38
For over a year, a coalition of ranchers and Indigenous people who lived
along the proposed route of the pipeline had been campaigning hard against the
project. But the action in Washington took the campaign national, and turned
it into a flashpoint for a resurgent U.S. climate movement.

The science for singling out Keystone XL was clear enough. The pipeline
would be carrying oil from the Alberta tar sands, and James Hansen, then still
working at NASA, had recently declared that if the bitumen trapped in the tar
sands was all dug up and burned, it would be “game over for the climate.”39 But
there was also some political strategy at work: unlike so many other key climate
policies, which either required approval from Congress or were made at the state
level, the decision about whether to approve the Keystone XL pipeline was up
to the State Department and, ultimately, the president himself, based on
whether he determined the project to be in the “national interest.” On this one,
Obama would have to give his personal yes or no, and it seemed to us that there
was value in extracting either answer.
If he said no, that would be a much needed victory on which to build at a
time when the U.S. climate movement, bruised from the failure to get energy
legislation through Congress, badly needed some good news. If he said yes, well,
that too would be clarifying. Climate activists, almost all of whom had worked
to get Obama elected, would have to finally abandon the hopes they had pinned
on the young senator who had proclaimed that his election would be
remembered as “the moment when the rise of the oceans began to slow and our
planet began to heal.”40 Letting go of that faith would be disillusioning for
many, but at least tactics could be adjusted accordingly. And it seemed we
would not have to wait long for a verdict: the president would be in a position
to make his decision by early September, which is why the civil disobedience
was called for the end of August.
It never occurred to us in those early strategy sessions at 350.org, the climate
organization that McKibben cofounded and where I am a board member, that
three years later we would still be waiting for the president’s yes or no. Three
years during which Obama waffled and procrastinated, while his administration
ordered more environmental reviews, then reviews of those reviews, then
reviews of those too.
A great deal of intellectual energy has been expended trying to interpret the
president’s mixed signals on Keystone XL—at times he seemed to be sending a
clear message that he was going to give his approval, as when he arranged for a
photo op in front of a raft of metal pipeline waiting to be laid down; other times
he seemed to be suggesting that he was leaning toward rejection, as when he
declared, in one of his more impassioned speeches about climate change, that
Keystone would be approved “only if this project does not significantly
exacerbate the problem of carbon pollution.”41

But whichever way the decision eventually goes (and one can hope that we
will know the answer by the time you read this), the drawn-out saga made at
least one thing absolutely clear. Like Angela Merkel, Obama has a hell of a hard
time saying no to the fossil fuel industry. And that’s a very big problem because
to lower emissions as rapidly and deeply as required, we need to keep large,
extremely profitable pools of carbon in the ground—resources that the fossil fuel
companies are fully intending to extract.
That means our governments are going to have to start putting strict limits
on the industry—limits ranging from saying no to pipelines linked to expanded
extraction, to caps on the amount of carbon corporations can emit, to banning
new coal-fired power plants, to winding down dirty-energy extraction projects
like the Alberta tar sands, to saying no to demands to open up new carbon
frontiers (like the oil trapped under melting Arctic ice).
In the 1960s and 1970s, when a flurry of environmental legislation was passed in
the U.S. and in other major industrial countries, saying no to dirty industry was,
though never easy, an accepted part of the balancing act of government. That is
simply no longer the case, as is evident from the howls of outrage from
Republicans and many Democrats over the mere suggestion that Obama might
reject Keystone XL, a moderate-sized infrastructure project that, by the
president’s own admission, would create so few lasting jobs that they represent
“a blip relative to the need.”42 Given how wrenchingly difficult that yes-or-no
regulatory decision proved to be, it should not be at all surprising that broader,
more forceful controls on how much carbon should be extracted and emitted
have thus far been entirely elusive.
Obama’s much-heralded move in June 2014 mandating emission reductions
from power plants was certainly the right direction, but the measures were still
much too timid to bring the U.S. in line with a safe temperature trajectory. As
author and long-time climate watcher Mark Hertsgaard observed at the time,
“President Obama clearly grasps the urgency of the climate crisis and has taken
important steps to address it. But it is his historical fate to be in power at a time
when good intentions and important steps are no longer enough. . . . Perhaps all
this places an unfair burden on President Obama. But science does not care
about fair, and leaders inherit the history they inherit.” And yet as Hertsgaard
acknowledges, the kind of policies that would be enough “seem preposterous to
the political and economic status quo.”43

This state of affairs is, of course, yet another legacy of the free market
counterrevolution. In virtually every country, the political class accepts the
premise that it is not the place of government to tell large corporations what
they can and cannot do, even when public health and welfare—indeed the
habitability of our shared home—are clearly at stake. The guiding ethos of lighttouch regulation, and more often of active deregulation, has taken an enormous
toll in every sector, most notably the financial one. It has also blocked
commonsense responses to the climate crisis at every turn—sometimes
explicitly, when regulations that would keep carbon in the ground are rejected
outright, but mostly implicitly, when those kinds of regulations are not even
proposed in the first place, and so-called market solutions are favored for tasks
to which they are wholly unequipped.
It’s true that the market is great at generating technological innovation and,
left to its own devices, R&D departments will continue to come up with
impressive new ways to make solar modules and electrical appliances more
efficient. But at the same time, market forces will also drive new and innovative
ways to get hard-to-reach fossil fuels out of the deep ocean and hard shale—and
those dirty innovations will make the green ones essentially irrelevant from a
climate change perspective.
At the Heartland conference, Cato’s Patrick Michaels inadvertently made
that point when he argued that, though he believes climate change is
happening, the real solution is to do nothing and wait for a technological
miracle to rain down from the heavens. “Doing nothing is actually doing
something,” he proclaimed, assuring the audience that “technologies of the
future” would save the day. His proof? “Two words: Shale gas. . . . That’s what
happens if you allow people to use their intellect, and their inquisitiveness, and
their drive, in order to produce new energy sources.” And of course the
Heartland audience cheered earnestly for the intellectual breakthrough that is
hydraulic fracturing (aka fracking) combined with horizontal drilling, the
technology that has finally allowed the fossil fuel industry to screw us
sideways.44
And it’s these “unconventional” methods of extracting fossil fuels that are
the strongest argument for forceful regulation. Because one of the greatest
misconceptions in the climate debate is that our society is refusing to change,
protecting a status quo called “business-as-usual.” The truth is that there is no
business-as-usual. The energy sector is changing dramatically all the time—but
the vast majority of those changes are taking us in precisely the wrong direction,

toward energy sources with even higher planet-warming emissions than their
conventional versions.
Take fracking. Natural gas’s reputation as a clean alternative to coal and oil
is based on emissions measurements from gas extracted through conventional
drilling practices. But in April 2011, a new study by leading scientists at Cornell
University showed that when gas is extracted through fracking, the emissions
picture changes dramatically.45
The study found that methane emissions linked to fracked natural gas are at
least 30 percent higher than the emissions linked to conventional gas. That’s
because the fracking process is leaky—methane leaks at every stage of
production, processing, storage, and distribution. And methane is an
extraordinarily dangerous greenhouse gas, thirty-four times more effective at
trapping heat than carbon dioxide, based on the latest Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change estimates. According to the Cornell study, this means that
fracked gas has a greater greenhouse gas impact than oil and may well have as
much of a warming impact as coal when the two energy sources are examined
over an extended life cycle.46
Furthermore, Cornell biogeochemist Robert Howarth, the lead author of the
study, points out that methane is an even more efficient trapper of heat in the
first ten to fifteen years after it is released—indeed it carries a warming potential
that is eighty-six times greater than that of carbon dioxide. And given that we
have reached “decade zero,” that matters a great deal. “It is in this shorter time
frame that we risk locking ourselves into very rapid warming,” Howarth
explains, especially because huge liquid natural gas export terminals currently
planned or being built in Australia, Canada, and the United States are not
being constructed to function for only the next decade but for closer to the next
half century. So, to put it bluntly, in the key period when we need to be looking
for ways to cut our emissions rapidly, the global gas boom is in the process of
constructing a network of ultra-powerful atmospheric ovens.47
The Cornell study was the first peer-reviewed research on the greenhouse gas
footprint of shale production, including from methane emissions, and its lead
author was quick to volunteer that his data were inadequate (largely due to the
industry’s lack of transparency). Still, the study was a bombshell, and though it
remains controversial, a steady stream of newer work has bolstered the case for a
high rate of methane leakage in the fracking process.III48
The gas industry isn’t the only one turning to dirtier, higher-risk methods.
Like Germany, the Czech Republic and Poland are increasingly relying on and

expanding production of extra-dirty lignite coal.49 And the major oil companies
are rushing into various tar sands deposits, most notably in Alberta, all with
significantly higher carbon footprints than conventional oil. They are also
moving into ever deeper and icier waters for offshore drilling, carrying the risk
of not just more catastrophic spills, as we saw with BP’s Deepwater Horizon
disaster, but spills that are simply impossible to clean up. Increasingly, these
extreme extraction methods—blasting oil and gas out of rock, steaming oil out
of tarlike dirt —are being used together, as when fracked natural gas is piped in
to superheat the water that melts the bitumen in the tar sands, to cite just one
example from the energy death spiral. What industry calls innovation, in other
words, looks more like the final suicidal throes of addiction. We are blasting the
bedrock of our continents, pumping our water with toxins, lopping off
mountaintops, scraping off boreal forests, endangering the deep ocean, and
scrambling to exploit the melting Arctic—all to get at the last drops and the
final rocks. Yes, some very advanced technology is making this possible, but it’s
not innovation, it’s madness.
The fact that fossil fuel companies have been permitted to charge into
unconventional fossil fuel extraction over the past decade was not inevitable,
but rather the result of very deliberate regulatory decisions—decisions to grant
these companies permits for massive new tar sands and coal mines; to open vast
swaths of the United States to natural gas fracking, virtually free from regulation
and oversight; to open up new stretches of territorial waters and lift existing
moratoriums on offshore drilling. These various decisions are a huge part of
what is locking us into disastrous levels of planetary warming. These decisions,
in turn, are the product of intense lobbying by the fossil fuel industry, motivated
by the most powerful driver of them all: the will to survive.
As a rule, extracting and refining unconventional energy is a far more
expensive and involved industrial process than doing the same for conventional
fuels. So, for instance, Imperial Oil (of which Exxon owns a majority share)
sank about $13 billion to open the sprawling Kearl open-pit mine in the Alberta
tar sands. At two hundred square kilometers, it will be one of the largest openpit mines in Canada, more than three times the size of Manhattan. And it is
only a fraction of the new construction planned for the tar sands: the
Conference Board of Canada projects that a total of $364 billion will be
invested through 2035.50
In Brazil, meanwhile, Britain’s BG Group is expected to make a $30 billion
investment over the next decade, much of it going into ultra-deepwater

“subsalt” projects in which oil is extracted from depths of approximately three
thousand meters (ten thousand feet). But the prize for fossil fuel lock-in surely
goes to Chevron, which is spending a projected $54 billion on a gas
development on Barrow Island, a “Class A Nature Reserve” off the northwest
coast of Australia. The project will release so much natural gas from the earth
that it is appropriately named Gorgon, after the terrifying, snake-haired female
monster of Greek mythology. One of Chevron’s partners in the project is Shell,
which is reportedly spending an additional $10–12 billion to build the largest
floating offshore facility ever constructed (longer than four soccer fields) in
order to extract natural gas from a different location off the northwest coast of
Australia.51
These investments won’t be recouped unless the companies that made them
are able to keep extracting for decades, since the up-front costs are amortized
over the life of the projects. Chevron’s Australia project is expected to keep
producing natural gas for at least thirty years, while Shell’s floating gas
monstrosity is built to function on that site for up to twenty-five years. Exxon’s
Alberta mine is projected to operate for forty years, as is BP/Husky Energy’s
enormous Sunrise project, also in the tar sands. This is only a small sampling of
mega-investments taking place around the world in the frantic scramble for
hard-to-extract oil, gas, and coal. The long time frames attached to all these
projects tell us something critical about the assumptions under which the fossil
fuel industry is working: it is betting that governments are not going to get
serious about emissions cuts for the next twenty-five to forty years. And yet
climate experts tell us that if we want to have a shot at keeping warming below
2 degrees Celsius, then developed country economies need to have begun their
energy turnaround by the end of this decade and to be almost completely
weaned from fossil fuels before 2050.52
If the companies have miscalculated and we do get serious about leaving
carbon in the ground, these huge projects will become what is known as
“stranded assets”—investments that lose their projected value as a result of, for
example, dramatic changes in environmental policy. When a company has a
great deal of expensive stranded assets on its books, the stock market takes
notice, and responds by bidding down the share price of the company that made
these bad bets.
This problem goes well beyond a few specific projects and is integrated into
the way that the market assigns value to companies that are in the business of
extracting finite resources from the earth. In order for the value of these

companies to remain stable or grow, oil and gas companies must always be able
to prove to their shareholders that they have fresh carbon reserves to exploit
after they exhaust those currently in production. This process is as crucial for
extractive companies as it is for a company that sells cars or clothing to show
their shareholders that they have preorders for their future products. At
minimum, an energy company is expected to have as much oil and gas in its
proven reserves as it does in current production, which would give it a “reservereplacement ratio” of 100 percent. As the popular site Investopedia explains, “A
company’s reserve replacement ratio must be at least 100% for the company to
stay in business longterm; otherwise, it will eventually run out of oil.”53
Which is why investors tend to get quite alarmed when the ratio drops below
that level. For instance, in 2009, on the same day that Shell announced that its
reserve-replacement ratio for the previous year had ominously dipped to 95
percent, the company scrambled to reassure the market that it was not in
trouble. It did this, tellingly, by declaring that it would cease new investments
in wind and solar energy. At the same time, it doubled down on a strategy of
adding new reserves from shale gas (accessible only through fracking),
deepwater oil, and tar sands. All in all, Shell managed that year to add a record
3.4 billion barrels of oil equivalent in new proven reserves—nearly three times
its production in 2009, or a reserve-replacement ratio of 288 percent. Its stock
price went up accordingly.54
For a fossil fuel major, keeping up its reserve-replacement ratio is an
economic imperative; without it, the company has no future. It has to keep
moving just to stand still. And it is this structural imperative that is pushing the
industry into the most extreme forms of dirty energy; there are simply not
enough conventional deposits left to keep up the replacement ratios. According
to the International Energy Agency’s annual World Energy Outlook report,
global conventional oil production from “existing fields” will drop from 68
million barrels per day in 2012 to an expected 27 million in 2035.55
That means that an oil company looking to reassure shareholders that it has
a plan for what to do, say, when the oil in Alaska’s Prudhoe Bay runs out, will
be forced to go into higher-risk, dirtier territories. It is telling, for instance, that
more than half of the reserves Exxon added in 2011 come from a single oil
project: the massive Kearl mine being developed in the Alberta tar sands.56 This
imperative also means that, so long as this business model is in place, no
coastline or aquifer will be safe. Every victory against the fossil fuel companies,
no matter how hard won, will be temporary, just waiting to be overtaken with

howls of “Drill, Baby, Drill.” It won’t be enough even when we can walk across
the Gulf of Mexico on the oil rigs, or when Australia’s Great Barrier Reef is a
parking lot for coal tankers, or when Greenland’s melting ice sheet is stained
black from a spill we have no idea how to clean up. Because these companies
will always need more reserves to top up their replacement ratios, year after year
after year.
From the perspective of a fossil fuel company, going after these high-risk
carbon deposits is not a matter of choice—it is its fiduciary responsibility to
shareholders, who insist on earning the same kinds of mega-profits next year as
they did this year and last year. And yet fulfilling that fiduciary responsibility
virtually guarantees that the planet will cook.
This is not hyperbole. In 2011, a think tank in London called the Carbon
Tracker Initiative conducted a breakthrough study that added together the
reserves claimed by all the fossil fuel companies, private and state-owned. It
found that the oil, gas, and coal to which these players had already laid claim—
deposits they have on their books and which were already making money for
shareholders—represented 2,795 gigatons of carbon (a gigaton is 1 billion
metric tons). That’s a very big problem because we know roughly how much
carbon can be burned between now and 2050 and still leave us a solid chance
(roughly 80 percent) of keeping warming below 2 degrees Celsius. According to
one highly credible study, that amount of carbon is 565 gigatons between 2011
and 2049. And as Bill McKibben points out, “The thing to notice is, 2,795 is
five times 565. It’s not even close.” He adds: “What those numbers mean is
quite simple. This industry has announced, in filings to the SEC and in promises
to shareholders, that they’re determined to burn five times more fossil fuel than
the planet’s atmosphere can begin to absorb.”57
Those numbers also tell us that the very thing we must do to avert
catastrophe—stop digging—is the very thing these companies cannot
contemplate without initiating their own demise. They tell us that getting
serious about climate change, which means cutting our emissions radically, is
simply not compatible with the continued existence of one of the most
profitable industries in the world.
And the amounts of money at stake are huge. The total amount of carbon in
reserve represents roughly $27 trillion—more than ten times the annual GDP of
the United Kingdom. If we were serious about keeping warming below 2
degrees, approximately 80 percent of that would be useless, stranded assets.
Given these stakes, it is no mystery why the fossil fuel companies fight furiously

to block every piece of legislation that would point us in the right emissions
direction, and why some directly fund the climate change denier movement.58
It also helps that these companies are so profitable that they have money not
just to burn, but to bribe—especially when that bribery is legal. In 2013 in the
United States alone, the oil and gas industry spent just under $400,000 a day
lobbying Congress and government officials, and the industry doled out a record
$73 million in federal campaign and political donations during the 2012
election cycle, an 87 percent jump from the 2008 elections.59
In Canada, corporations are not required to disclose how much money they
spend on lobbying, but the number of times they communicate with public
officials is a matter of public record. A 2012 report found that a single industry
organization—the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers—spoke with
federal government officials 536 times between 2008 and 2012, while
TransCanada, the company behind the Keystone XL pipeline, had 279
communications. The Climate Action Network, on the other hand, the
country’s broadest coalition devoted to emission reductions, only logged six
communications in the same period. In the U.K., the energy industry met with
the Department of Energy and Climate Change roughly eleven times more
frequently than green groups did during David Cameron’s first year in office. In
fact, it has become increasingly difficult to discern where the oil and gas
industry ends and the British government begins. As The Guardian reported in
2011, “At least 50 employees of companies including EDF Energy, npower and
Centrica have been placed within government to work on energy issues in the
past four years. . . . The staff are provided free of charge and work within the
departments for secondments of up to two years.”60
What all this money and access means is that every time the climate crisis
rightfully triggers our collective self-preservation instinct, the incredible
monetary power of the fossil fuel industry—driven by its own, more immediate
self-preservation instinct—gets in the way. Environmentalists often speak about
contemporary humanity as the proverbial frog in a pot of boiling water, too
accustomed to the gradual increases in heat to jump to safety. But the truth is
that humanity has tried to jump quite a few times. In Rio in 1992. In Kyoto in
1997. In 2006 and 2007, when global concern rose yet again after the release of
An Inconvenient Truth and with the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to Al
Gore and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. In 2009, in the lead
up to the United Nations climate summit in Copenhagen. The problem is that

the money that perverts the political process acts as a kind of lid, intercepting
that survival instinct and keeping us all in the pot.
The influence wielded by the fossil fuel lobby goes a long way toward
explaining why the sector is so very unconcerned about the nonbinding
commitments made by politicians at U.N. climate summits to keep temperatures
below 2 degrees Celsius. Indeed the day the Copenhagen summit concluded—
when the target was made official—the share prices of some of the largest fossil
fuel companies hardly reacted at all.61
Clearly, intelligent investors had determined that the promises governments
made in that forum were nothing to worry about—that they were not nearly as
important as the actions of their powerful energy departments back home that
grant mining and drilling permits. Indeed in March 2014, ExxonMobil
confirmed as much when the company came under pressure from activist
shareholders to respond to reports that much of its reserves would become
stranded assets if governments kept promises to keep warming below 2 degrees
by passing aggressive climate legislation. The company explained that it had
determined that restrictive climate policies were “highly unlikely” and, “based
on this analysis, we are confident that none of our hydrocarbon reserves are now
or will become ‘stranded.’ ”62
Those working inside government understand these dynamics all too well.
John Ashton, who served as special representative for climate change to three
successive U.K. governments between 2006 and 2012, told me that he would
often point out to his colleagues making energy policy that their approach to
the development of fossil fuels contradicted the government’s claim to be
“running a 2 degree climate policy.” But when he did, they “simply ignored my
efforts and carried on as before—I might as well have been speaking in Attic
Greek.” From this Ashton concluded, “In government it is usually easy to rectify
a slight misalignment between two policies but near impossible to resolve a
complete contradiction. Where there is a contradiction, the forces of
incumbency start with a massive advantage.”63
This dynamic will shift only when the power (and wealth) of the fossil fuel
industry is seriously eroded. Which is very tough to do: the handy thing about
selling natural resources upon which entire economies have been built—and
about having so far succeeded in blocking policies that would offer real
alternatives—is that most people keep having to buy your products whether
they like you or not. So since these companies are going to continue being rich
for the foreseeable future, the best hope of breaking the political deadlock is to

radically restrict their ability to spend their profits buying, and bullying,
politicians.
The good news for the climate movement is that there are a whole lot of
other sectors that also have an active interest in curtailing the influence of
money over politics, particularly in the U.S., the country that has been the most
significant barrier to climate progress. After all, climate action has failed on
Capitol Hill for the same reasons that serious financial sector reform didn’t pass
after the 2008 meltdown and the same reasons gun reform didn’t pass after the
horrific 2012 school shooting in Newtown, Connecticut. Which in turn are the
same reasons why Obama’s health reform failed to take on the perverting
influence of the medical insurance and pharmaceutical companies. All these
attempts to fix glaring and fundamental flaws in the system have failed because
large corporations wield far too much political power—a power exerted through
corporate campaign contributions, many of them secret; through almost
unfettered access to regulators via their lobbyists; through the notorious
revolving door between business and government; as well as through the “free
speech” rights these corporations have been granted by the U.S. Supreme
Court. And though U.S. politics are particularly far gone in this regard, no
Western democracy has a level playing field when it comes to political access
and power.
Because these distortions have been in place for so long—and harm so many
diverse constituencies—a great many smart people have done a huge amount of
thinking about what it would take to clean up the system. As with responses to
climate change, the problem is not an absence of “solutions”—the solutions are
clear. Politicians must be prohibited from receiving donations from the
industries they regulate, or from accepting jobs in lieu of bribes; political
donations need to be both fully disclosed and tightly capped; campaigns must be
given the right to access the public airwaves; and, ideally, elections should be
publicly funded as a basic cost of having a democracy.
Yet among large sections of the public, a sense of fatalism pervades: how can
you convince politicians to vote for reforms designed to free them from the
binds of corporate influence when those binds are still tightly in place? It’s
tough, to be sure, but the only thing politicians fear more than losing donations
is losing elections. And this is where the power of climate change—and its
potential for building the largest possible political tent—comes into play. As we
have seen, the scientific warnings that we are running out of time to avert
climate disaster are coming from a galaxy of credible scientific organizations and

establishment international agencies—from the American Association for the
Advancement of Science to NASA to Britain’s Royal Society to the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change to the U.S. National Academy of
Sciences to the World Bank to the International Energy Agency. A resurgent
climate movement could use those warnings to light a fire under the call to kick
corporate money out of politics—not just fossil fuel money, but money from all
the deep-pocketed barriers to progress from the National Rifle Association to
the fast food industry to the private-prison complex. Such a rallying cry could
bring together all of the various constituencies that would benefit from reducing
corporate power over politics—from health care workers to parents worried
about their children’s safety at school. There are no guarantees that this
coalition could succeed where other attempts at similar reforms have failed. But
it certainly seems worth expending at least as much energy and money as the
U.S. climate movement did trying, unsuccessfully, to push through climate
legislation that it knew was wholly inadequate, precisely because it was written
to try to neutralize opposition from fossil fuel companies (more on that later).

Not an “Issue,” a Frame
The link between challenging corruption and lowering emissions is just one
example of how the climate emergency could—by virtue of its urgency and the
fact that it impacts, well, everyone on earth—breathe new life into a political
goal for which there is already a great deal of public support. The same holds
true for many of the other issues discussed so far—from raising taxes on the rich
to blocking harmful new trade deals to reinvesting in the public sphere. But
before those kinds of alliances can be built, some very bad habits will need to be
abandoned.
Environmentalists have a long history of behaving as if no issue is more
important than the Big One—why, some wonder (too often out loud), is
everyone wasting their time worrying about women’s rights and poverty and
wars when it’s blindingly obvious that none of this matters if the planet decides
to start ejecting us for poor behavior? When the first Earth Day was declared in
1970, one of the movement’s leaders, Democratic senator Gaylord Nelson,
declared that the environmental crisis made “Vietnam, nuclear war, hunger,
decaying cities, and all other major problems one could name . . . relatively
insignificant by comparison.” Which helps explains why the great radical

journalist I. F. Stone described Earth Day as “a gigantic snowjob” that was using
“rock and roll, idealism and non-inflammatory social issues to turn the youth off
from more urgent concerns which might really threaten our power structure.”64
They were both wrong. The environmental crisis—if conceived sufficiently
broadly—neither trumps nor distracts from our most pressing political and
economic causes: it supercharges each one of them with existential urgency. As
Yotam Marom, an organizer with Occupy Wall Street in New York, wrote in
July 2013, “The fight for the climate isn’t a separate movement, it’s both a
challenge and an opportunity for all of our movements. We don’t need to
become climate activists, we are climate activists. We don’t need a separate
climate movement; we need to seize the climate moment.”65
The nature of the moment is familiar but bears repeating: whether or not
industrialized countries begin deeply cutting our emissions this decade will
determine whether we can expect the same from rapidly developing nations like
China and India next decade. That, in turn, will determine whether or not
humanity can stay within a collective carbon budget that will give us a decent
chance of keeping warming below levels that our own governments have agreed
are unacceptably dangerous. In other words, we don’t have another couple of
decades to talk about the changes we want while being satisfied with the
occasional incremental victory. This set of hard facts calls for strategy, clear
deadlines, dogged focus—all of which are sorely missing from most progressive
movements at the moment.
Even more importantly, the climate moment offers an overarching narrative
in which everything from the fight for good jobs to justice for migrants to
reparations for historical wrongs like slavery and colonialism can all become
part of the grand project of building a nontoxic, shockproof economy before it’s
too late.
And it is also worth remembering because it’s so very easy to forget: the
alternative to such a project is not the status quo extended indefinitely. It is
climate-change-fueled disaster capitalism—profiteering disguised as emission
reduction, privatized hyper-militarized borders, and, quite possibly, high-risk
geoengineering when things spiral out of control.
So how realistic is it to imagine that the climate crisis could be a political
game changer, a unifier for all these disparate issues and movements? Well,
there is a reason hard-right conservatives are putting so much effort into
denying its existence. Their political project is not, after all, as sturdy as it was
in 1988, when climate change first pierced public consciousness. Free market

ideology may still bind the imaginations of our elites, but for most of the general
public, it has been drained of its powers to persuade. The disastrous track record
of the past three decades of neoliberal policy is simply too apparent. Each new
blast of statistics about how a tiny band of global oligarchs controls half the
world’s wealth exposes the policies of privatization and deregulation for the
thinly veiled license to steal that they always were. Each new report of factory
fires in Bangladesh, soaring pollution in China, and water cut-offs in Detroit
reminds us that free trade was exactly the race to the bottom that so many
warned it would be. And each news story about an Italian or Greek pensioner
who took his or her own life rather than try to survive under another round of
austerity is a reminder of how many lives continue to be sacrificed for the few.
The failure of deregulated capitalism to deliver on its promises is why, since
2009, public squares around the world have turned into rotating semipermanent
encampments of the angry and dispossessed. It’s also why there are now more
calls for fundamental change than at any point since the 1960s. It’s why a
challenging book like Thomas Piketty’s Capital in the Twenty-First Century,
exposing the built-in structures of ever-increasing wealth concentration, can sit
atop bestseller lists for months, and why when comedian and social
commentator Russell Brand went on the BBC and called for “revolution,” his
appearance attracted more than ten million YouTube views.66
Climate change pits what the planet needs to maintain stability against what
our economic model needs to sustain itself. But since that economic model is
failing the vast majority of the people on the planet on multiple fronts that
might not be such a bad thing. Put another way, if there has ever been a
moment to advance a plan to heal the planet that also heals our broken
economies and our shattered communities, this is it.
Al Gore called climate change “an inconvenient truth,” which he defined as
an inescapable fact that we would prefer to ignore. Yet the truth about climate
change is inconvenient only if we are satisfied with the status quo except for the
small matter of warming temperatures. If, however, we see the need for
transformation quite apart from those warming temperatures, then the fact that
our current road is headed toward a cliff is, in an odd way, convenient—because
it tells us that we had better start making that sweeping turn, and fast.
Not surprisingly, the people who understand this best are those whom our
economic model has always been willing to sacrifice. The environmental justice
movement, the loose network of groups working with communities on the toxic
front lines of extractive industries—next to refineries, for instance, or

downstream from mines—has always argued that a robust response to emission
reduction could form the basis of a transformative economic project. In fact the
slogan long embraced by this movement has been “System Change, Not
Climate Change”—a recognition that these are the two choices we face.67
“The climate justice fight here in the U.S. and around the world is not just a
fight against the [biggest] ecological crisis of all time,” Miya Yoshitani, executive
director of the Oakland-based Asian Pacific Environmental Network (APEN),
explains. “It is the fight for a new economy, a new energy system, a new
democracy, a new relationship to the planet and to each other, for land, water,
and food sovereignty, for Indigenous rights, for human rights and dignity for all
people. When climate justice wins we win the world that we want. We can’t sit
this one out, not because we have too much to lose but because we have too
much to gain. . . . We are bound together in this battle, not just for a reduction
in the parts per million of CO2, but to transform our economies and rebuild a
world that we want today.”68
This is what many liberal commentators get wrong when they assume that
climate action is futile because it asks us to sacrifice in the name of far-off
benefits. “How can you persuade the human race to put the future ahead of the
present?” asked Observer columnist Nick Cohen despondently.69 The answer is
that you don’t. You point out, as Yoshitani does, that for a great many people,
climate action is their best hope for a better present, and a future far more
exciting than anything else currently on offer.
Yoshitani is part of a vibrant activist scene in the San Francisco Bay Area
that is ground zero of the green jobs movement most prominently championed
by former Obama advisor Van Jones. When I first met Yoshitani, the Asian
Pacific Environmental Network was working closely with Asian immigrants in
Oakland to demand affordable housing close to a mass transit station to make
sure that gentrification didn’t displace the people who actually use subways and
buses. And APEN has also been part of an initiative to help create worker coops in the solar energy sector in nearby Richmond, so that there are jobs on
offer other than the ones at the local Chevron oil refinery.
More such connections between climate action and economic justice are
being made all the time. As we will see, communities trying to stop dangerous
oil pipelines or natural gas fracking are building powerful new alliances with
Indigenous peoples whose territories are also at risk from these activities. And
several large environmental organizations in the U.S.—including Greenpeace,
the Sierra Club, the BlueGreen Alliance, and 350.org—took stands in support

of demands for comprehensive reform of the U.S. immigration system, in part
because migration is increasingly linked to climate and also because members of
immigrant communities are often prevented from defending themselves against
heightened environmental risks since doing so could lead to incarceration or
deportation.70
These are encouraging signs, and there are plenty of others. Yet the kind of
counter-power that has a chance of changing society on anything close to the
scale required is still missing. It is a painful irony that while the right is forever
casting climate change as a left-wing plot, most leftists and liberals are still
averting their eyes, having yet to grasp that climate science has handed them
the most powerful argument against unfettered capitalism since William Blake’s
“dark Satanic Mills” blackened England’s skies (which, incidentally, was the
beginning of climate change). By all rights, this reality should be filling
progressive sails with conviction, lending new confidence to the demands for a
more just economic model. And yet when demonstrators are protesting the
various failures of this system in Athens, Madrid, Istanbul, and New York,
climate change is too often little more than a footnote when it could be the
coup de grâce.71
The mainstream environmental movement, meanwhile, generally stands
apart from these expressions of mass frustration, choosing to define climate
activism narrowly—demanding a carbon tax, say, or even trying to stop a
pipeline. And those campaigns are important. But building a mass movement
that has a chance of taking on the corporate forces arrayed against science-based
emission reduction will require the broadest possible spectrum of allies. That
would include the public sector workers—firefighters, nurses, teachers, garbage
collectors—fighting to protect the services and infrastructure that will be our
best protection against climate change. It would include antipoverty activists
trying to protect affordable housing in downtown cores, rather than allowing
low-income people to be pushed by gentrification into sprawling peripheries
that require more driving. As Colin Miller of Oakland-based Bay Localize told
me, “Housing is a climate issue.” And it would include transit riders fighting
against fare increases at a time when we should be doing everything possible to
make subways and buses more comfortable and affordable for all. Indeed when
masses of people take to the streets to stop such fare hikes and demand free
public transit—as they did in Brazil in June and July of 2013—these actions
should be welcomed as part of a global effort to fight climate chaos, even if
those populist movements never once use the words “climate change.”72

Perhaps it should be no surprise that a sustained and populist climate
movement has not yet emerged—a movement like that has yet to be sustained
to counter any of the other failures of this economic model. Yes, there have
been periods when mass outrage in the face of austerity, corruption, and
inequality has spilled into the streets and the squares for weeks and months on
end. Yet if the recent years of rapid-fire rebellions have demonstrated anything,
it is that these movements are snuffed out far too quickly, whether by repression
or political cooptation, while the structures they opposed reconstitute
themselves in more terrifying and dangerous forms. Witness Egypt. Or the
inequalities that have grown even more obscene since the 2008 economic crisis,
despite the many movements that rose up to resist the bailouts and austerity
measures.
I have, in the past, strongly defended the right of young movements to their
amorphous structures—whether that means rejecting identifiable leadership or
eschewing programmatic demands. And there is no question that old political
habits and structures must be reinvented to reflect new realities, as well as past
failures. But I confess that the last five years immersed in climate science has left
me impatient. As many are coming to realize, the fetish for structurelessness, the
rebellion against any kind of institutionalization, is not a luxury today’s
transformative movements can afford.
The core of the problem comes back to the same inescapable fact that has
both blocked climate action and accelerated emissions: all of us are living in the
world that neoliberalism built, even if we happen to be critics of neoliberalism.
In practice that means that, despite endless griping, tweeting, flash mobbing,
and occupying, we collectively lack many of the tools that built and sustained
the transformative movements of the past. Our public institutions are
disintegrating, while the institutions of the traditional left—progressive political
parties, strong unions, membership-based community service organizations—are
fighting for their lives.
And the challenge goes deeper than a lack of institutional tools and reaches
into our very selves. Contemporary capitalism has not just accelerated the
behaviors that are changing the climate. This economic model has changed a
great many of us as individuals, accelerated and uprooted and dematerialized us
as surely as it has finance capital, leaving us at once everywhere and nowhere.
These are the hand-wringing clichés of our time—What is Twitter doing to my
attention span? What are screens doing to our relationships?—but the

preoccupations have particular relevance to the way we relate to the climate
challenge.
Because this is a crisis that is, by its nature, slow moving and intensely place
based. In its early stages, and in between the wrenching disasters, climate is
about an early blooming of a particular flower, an unusually thin layer of ice on
a lake, the late arrival of a migratory bird—noticing these small changes requires
the kind of communion that comes from knowing a place deeply, not just as
scenery but also as sustenance, and when local knowledge is passed on with a
sense of sacred trust from one generation to the next. How many of us still live
like that? Similarly, climate change is also about the inescapable impact of the
actions of past generations not just on the present, but on generations in the
future. These time frames are a language that has become foreign to a great
many of us. Indeed Western culture has worked very hard to erase Indigenous
cosmologies that call on the past and the future to interrogate present-day
actions, with long-dead ancestors always present, alongside the generations yet
to come.
In short: more bad timing. Just when we needed to slow down and notice the
subtle changes in the natural world that are telling us that something is seriously
amiss, we have sped up; just when we needed longer time horizons to see how
the actions of our past impact the prospects for our future, we entered into the
never-ending feed of the perpetual now, slicing and dicing our attention spans
as never before.
To understand how we got to this place of profound disconnection from our
surroundings and one another, and to think about how we might build a politics
based on reconnection, we will need to go back a good deal further than 1988.
Because the truth is that, while contemporary, hyper-globalized capitalism has
exacerbated the climate crisis, it did not create it. We started treating the
atmosphere as our waste dump when we began using coal on a commercial scale
in the late 1700s and engaged in similarly reckless ecological practices well
before that.
Moreover, humans have behaved in this shortsighted way not only under
capitalist systems, but under systems that called themselves socialist as well
(whether they were or not remains a subject of debate). Indeed the roots of the
climate crisis date back to core civilizational myths on which postEnlightenment Western culture is founded—myths about humanity’s duty to
dominate a natural world that is believed to be at once limitless and entirely
controllable. This is not a problem that can be blamed on the political right or

on the United States; these are powerful cultural narratives that transcend
geography and ideological divides.
I have, so far, emphasized the familiarity of many of the deep solutions to the
climate crisis and there is real comfort to take from that. It means that in many
of our key responses, we would not be embarking on this tremendous project
from scratch but rather drawing on more than a century of progressive work. But
truly rising to the climate challenge—particularly its challenge to economic
growth—will require that we dig even deeper into our past, and move into some
distinctly uncharted political territory.

I. Workers in the U.S. and Europe have attempted to emulate this model in recent years during several
plant closures, most notably the high-profile Republic Windows and Doors factory in Chicago, which was
shut down during the economic crisis and then occupied by its workers. Today many of those former
employees are now worker-owners at the reborn New Era Windows Cooperative.
II. Much of the support for nuclear power as a solution to global warming is based on the promise of
“next generation” nuclear technologies, which range from more efficient reactors cooled with gas instead of
water, to “fast reactor” designs that can run on spent fuel or “breed” more fuel in addition to consuming it
—or even nuclear fusion, in which atomic nuclei are forced together (as occurs in the sun) rather than
split. Boosters of these groundbreaking technologies assure us that they eliminate many of the risks
currently associated with nuclear energy, from meltdowns to longterm waste storage to weaponization of
enriched uranium. And perhaps they do have the potential to eliminate some of those risks. But since
these technologies are untested, and some may carry even greater risks, the onus is on the boosters, not on
the rest of us, to demonstrate their safety. All the more so because we have proven clean, renewable
technologies available, and democratic, participatory models for their implementation, that demand no
such risks.
III. There is a great deal of confusion about the climate benefits of natural gas because the fuel is often
given credit for a 12 percent drop in U.S. carbon dioxide emissions since 2007. But this good news does
not address the fact that methane emissions have been rising over the past decade, or the fact that U.S.
methane emissions are very likely underestimated, since leakage has been extremely poorly accounted for.
Moreover, many experts and modelers warn that any climate gains from the shale boom will continue to be
undercut not only by potent methane emissions, but also by the tendency of cheap natural gas to displace
wind and solar. Similarly, as coal generation is displaced by natural gas in the U.S., coal companies are
simply exporting their dirty product overseas, which according to one analysis by the CO2 Scorecard
Group has “more than offset” the emissions savings from natural gas since 2007.

5

BEYOND EXTRACTIVISM
Confronting the Climate Denier Within
“The best thing about the Earth is if you poke holes in it oil and gas comes out.”
—Republican U.S. Congressman Steve Stockman, 20131

“The open veins of Latin America are still bleeding.”
—Bolivian Indigenous leader Nilda Rojas Huanca, 20142

“It is our predicament that we live in a finite world, and yet we behave as if it were infinite.
Steady exponential material growth with no limits on resource consumption and population
is the dominant conceptual model used by today’s decision makers. This is an
approximation of reality that is no longer accurate and [has] started to break down.”
—Global systems analyst Rodrigo Castro and colleagues, paper presented at a scientific modeling conference, 20143

For the past few years, the island of Nauru has been on a health kick. The
concrete walls of public buildings are covered in murals urging regular exercise
and healthy eating, and warning against the danger of diabetes. Young people
are asking their grandparents how to fish, a lost skill. But there is a problem. As
Nerida-Ann Steshia Hubert, who works at a diabetes center on the island,
explains, life spans on Nauru are short, in part because of an epidemic of the
disease. “The older folks are passing away early and we’re losing a lot of the
knowledge with them. It’s like a race against time—trying to get the knowledge
from them before they die.”4
For decades, this tiny, isolated South Pacific island, just twenty-one square
kilometers and home to ten thousand people, was held up as a model for the
world—a developing country that was doing everything right. In the early

1960s, the Australian government, whose troops seized control of Nauru from
the Germans in 1914, was so proud of its protectorate that it made promotional
videos showing the Micronesians in starched white Bermuda shorts, obediently
following lessons in English-speaking schools, settling their disputes in Britishstyle courts, and shopping for modern conveniences in well-stocked grocery
stores.5
During the 1970s and 1980s, after Nauru had earned independence, the
island was periodically featured in press reports as a place of almost obscene
riches, much as Dubai is invoked today. An Associated Press article from 1985
reported that Nauruans had “the world’s highest per capita gross national
product . . . higher even than Persian Gulf oil Sheikdoms.” Everyone had free
health care, housing, and education; homes were kept cool with airconditioning; and residents zoomed around their tiny island—it took twenty
minutes to make the entire loop—in brand-new cars and motorcycles. A police
chief famously bought himself a yellow Lamborghini. “When I was young,”
recalls Steshia Hubert, “we would go to parties where people would throw
thousands of dollars on the babies. Extravagant parties—first, sixteenth,
eighteenth, twenty-first, and fiftieth birthdays. . . . They would come with gifts
like cars, pillows stuffed with hundred-dollar bills—for one-year-old babies!”6
All of Nauru’s monetary wealth derived from an odd geological fact. For
hundreds of thousands of years, when the island was nothing but a cluster of
coral reefs protruding from the waves, Nauru was a popular pit stop for migrating
birds, who dropped by to feast on the shellfish and mollusks. Gradually, the bird
poop built up between the coral towers and spires, eventually hardening to form
a rocky landmass. The rock was then covered over in topsoil and dense forest,
creating a tropical oasis of coconut palms, tranquil beaches, and thatched huts
so beatific that the first European visitors dubbed the island Pleasant Isle.7
For thousands of years, Nauruans lived on the surface of their island,
sustaining themselves on fish and black noddy birds. That began to change
when a colonial officer picked up a rock that was later discovered to be made of
almost pure phosphate of lime, a valuable agricultural fertilizer. A GermanBritish firm began mining, later replaced by a British–Australian–New Zealand
venture.8 Nauru started developing at record speed—the catch was that it was,
simultaneously, commiting suicide.
By the 1960s, Nauru still looked pleasant enough when approached from the
sea, but it was a mirage. Behind the narrow fringe of coconut palms circling the
coast lay a ravaged interior. Seen from above, the forest and topsoil of the oval

island were being voraciously stripped away; the phosphate mined down to the
island’s sharply protruding bones, leaving behind a forest of ghostly coral totems.
With the center now uninhabitable and largely infertile except for some minor
scrubby vegetation, life on Nauru unfolded along the thin coastal strip, where
the homes and civic structures were located.9
Nauru’s successive waves of colonizers—whose economic emissaries ground
up the phosphate rock into fine dust, then shipped it on ocean liners to fertilize
soil in Australia and New Zealand—had a simple plan for the country: they
would keep mining phosphate until the island was an empty shell. “When the
phosphate supply is exhausted in thirty to forty years’ time, the experts predict
that the estimated population will not be able to live on this pleasant little
island,” a Nauruan council member said, rather stiffly, in a sixties-era black-andwhite video produced by the Australian government. But not to worry, the
film’s narrator explained: “Preparations are being made now for the future of the
Nauruan people. Australia has offered them a permanent home within her own
shores. . . . Their prospects are bright; their future is secure.”10
Nauru, in other words, was developed to disappear, designed by the
Australian government and the extractive companies that controlled its fate as
a disposable country. It’s not that they had anything against the place, no
genocidal intent per se. It’s just that one dead island that few even knew existed
seemed like an acceptable sacrifice to make in the name of the progress
represented by industrial agriculture.
When the Nauruans themselves took control of their country in 1968, they
had hopes of reversing these plans. Toward that end, they put a large chunk of
their mining revenues into a trust fund that they invested in what seemed like
stable real estate ventures in Australia and Hawaii. The goal was to live off the
fund’s proceeds while winding down phosphate mining and beginning to
rehabilitate their island’s ecology—a costly task, but perhaps not impossible.11
The plan failed. Nauru’s government received catastrophically bad
investment advice, and the country’s mining wealth was squandered.
Meanwhile, Nauru continued to disappear, its white powdery innards loaded
onto boats as the mining continued unabated. Meanwhile, decades of easy
money had taken a predictable toll on Nauruans’ life and culture. Politics was
rife with corruption, drunk driving was a leading cause of death, average life
expectancy was dismally low, and Nauru earned the dubious honor of being
featured on a U.S. news show as “the fattest place on Earth” (half the adult
population suffers from type 2 diabetes, the result of a diet comprised almost

exclusively of imported processed food). “During the golden era when the
royalties were rolling in, we didn’t cook, we ate in restaurants,” recalls Steshia
Hubert, a health care worker. And even if the Nauruans had wanted to eat
differently, it would have been hard: with so much of the island a latticework of
deep dark holes, growing enough fresh produce to feed the population was pretty
much impossible. A bitterly ironic infertility for an island whose main export
was agricultural fertilizer.12
By the 1990s, Nauru was so desperate for foreign currency that it pursued
some distinctly shady get-rich-quick schemes. Aided greatly by the wave of
financial deregulation unleashed in this period, the island became a prime
money-laundering haven. For a time in the late 1990s, Nauru was the titular
“home” to roughly four hundred phantom banks that were utterly
unencumbered by monitoring, oversight, taxes, and regulation. Nauru-registered
shell banks were particularly popular among Russian gangsters, who reportedly
laundered a staggering $70 billion of dirty money through the island nation (to
put that in perspective, Nauru’s entire GDP is $72 million, according to most
recent figures). Giving the country partial credit for the collapse of the Russian
economy, a New York Times Magazine piece in 2000 pronounced that “amid the
recent proliferation of money-laundering centers that experts estimate has
ballooned into a $5 trillion shadow economy, Nauru is Public Enemy #1.”13
These schemes have since caught up with Nauru too, and now the country
faces a double bankruptcy: with 90 percent of the island depleted from mining,
it faces ecological bankruptcy; with a debt of at least $800 million, Nauru faces
financial bankruptcy as well. But these are not Nauru’s only problems. It now
turns out that the island nation is highly vulnerable to a crisis it had virtually no
hand in creating: climate change and the drought, ocean acidification, and
rising waters it brings. Sea levels around Nauru have been steadily climbing by
about 5 millimeters per year since 1993, and much more could be on the way if
current trends continue. Intensified droughts are already causing severe
freshwater shortages.14
A decade ago, Australian philosopher and professor of sustainability Glenn
Albrecht set out to coin a term to capture the particular form of psychological
distress that sets in when the homelands that we love and from which we take
comfort are radically altered by extraction and industrialization, rendering them
alienating and unfamiliar. He settled on “solastalgia,” with its evocations of
solace, destruction, and pain, and defined the new word to mean, “the
homesickness you have when you are still at home.” He explained that although

this particular form of unease was once principally familiar to people who lived
in sacrifice zones—lands decimated by open-pit mining, for instance, or clearcut logging—it was fast becoming a universal human experience, with climate
change creating a “new abnormal” wherever we happen to live. “As bad as local
and regional negative transformation is, it is the big picture, the Whole Earth,
which is now a home under assault. A feeling of global dread asserts itself as the
planet heats and our climate gets more hostile and unpredictable,” he writes.15
Some places are unlucky enough to experience both local and global
solastalgia simultaneously. Speaking to the 1997 U.N. climate conference that
adopted the Kyoto Protocol, Nauru’s then-president Kinza Clodumar described
the collective claustrophobia that had gripped his country: “We are trapped, a
wasteland at our back, and to our front a terrifying, rising flood of biblical
proportions.”16 Few places on earth embody the suicidal results of building our
economies on polluting extraction more graphically than Nauru. Thanks to its
mining of phosphate, Nauru has spent the last century disappearing from the
inside out; now, thanks to our collective mining of fossil fuels, it is disappearing
from the outside in.
In a 2007 cable about Nauru, made public by WikiLeaks, an unnamed U.S.
official summed up his government’s analysis of what went wrong on the island:
“Nauru simply spent extravagantly, never worrying about tomorrow.”17 Fair
enough, but that diagnosis is hardly unique to Nauru; our entire culture is
extravagantly drawing down finite resources, never worrying about tomorrow.
For a couple of hundred years we have been telling ourselves that we can dig the
midnight black remains of other life forms out of the bowels of the earth, burn
them in massive quantities, and that the airborne particles and gases released
into the atmosphere—because we can’t see them—will have no effect
whatsoever. Or if they do, we humans, brilliant as we are, will just invent our
way out of whatever mess we have made.
And we tell ourselves all kinds of similarly implausible no-consequences
stories all the time, about how we can ravage the world and suffer no adverse
effects. Indeed we are always surprised when it works out otherwise. We extract
and do not replenish and wonder why the fish have disappeared and the soil
requires ever more “inputs” (like phosphate) to stay fertile. We occupy countries
and arm their militias and then wonder why they hate us. We drive down wages,
ship jobs overseas, destroy worker protections, hollow out local economies, then
wonder why people can’t afford to shop as much as they used to. We offer those

failed shoppers subprime mortgages instead of steady jobs and then wonder why
no one foresaw that a system built on bad debts would collapse.
At every stage our actions are marked by a lack of respect for the powers we
are unleashing—a certainty, or at least a hope, that the nature we have turned
to garbage, and the people we have treated like garbage, will not come back to
haunt us. And Nauru knows all about this too, because in the past decade it has
become a dumping ground of another sort. In an effort to raise much needed
revenue, it agreed to house an offshore refugee detention center for the
government of Australia. In what has become known as “the Pacific Solution,”
Australian navy and customs ships intercept boats of migrants and immediately
fly them three thousand kilometers to Nauru (as well as to several other Pacific
islands). Once on Nauru, the migrants—most from Afghanistan, Sri Lanka,
Iraq, Iran, and Pakistan—are crammed into a rat-infested guarded camp made
up of rows of crowded, stiflingly hot tents. The island imprisonment can last up
to five years, with the migrants in a state of constant limbo about their status,
something the Australian government hopes will serve as a deterrent to future
refugees.18
The Australian and Nauruan governments have gone to great lengths to
limit information on camp conditions and have prevented journalists who make
the long journey to the island from seeing where migrants are being housed. But
the truth is leaking out nonetheless: grainy video of prisoners chanting “We are
not animals”; reports of mass hunger strikes and suicide attempts; horrifying
photographs of refugees who had sewn their own mouths shut, using paper clips
as needles; an image of a man who had badly mutilated his neck in a failed
hanging attempt. There are also images of toddlers playing in the dirt and
huddling with their parents under tent flaps for shade (originally the camp had
housed only adult males, but now hundreds of women and children have been
sent there too). In June 2013, the Australian government finally allowed a BBC
crew into the camp in order to show off its brand-new barracks—but that PR
attempt was completely upstaged one month later by the news that a prisoner
riot had almost completely destroyed the new facility, leaving several prisoners
injured.19
Amnesty International has called the camp on Nauru “cruel” and
“degrading,” and a 2013 report by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees concluded that those conditions, “coupled with the protracted period
spent there by some asylum-seekers, raise serious issues about their compatibility
with international human rights law, including the prohibition against torture

and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.” Then, in March 2014, a former
Salvation Army employee named Mark Isaacs, who had been stationed at the
camp, published a tell-all memoir titled The Undesirables. He wrote about men
who had survived wars and treacherous voyages losing all will to live on Nauru,
with one man resorting to swallowing cleaning fluids, another driven mad and
barking like a dog. Isaacs likened the camp to “death factories,” and said in an
interview that it is about “taking resilient men and grinding them into the
dust.” On an island that itself was systematically ground to dust, it’s a harrowing
image. As harrowing as enlisting the people who could very well be the climate
refugees of tomorrow to play warden to the political and economic refugees of
today.20
Reviewing the island’s painful history, it strikes me that so much of what has
gone wrong on Nauru—and goes on still—has to do with its location, frequently
described as “the middle of nowhere” or, in the words of a 1921 National
Geographic dispatch, “perhaps the most remote territory in the world,” a tiny dot
“in lonely seas.” The nation’s remoteness made it a convenient trash can—a
place to turn the land into trash, to launder dirty money, to disappear unwanted
people, and now a place that may be allowed to disappear altogether.21
This is our relationship to much that we cannot easily see and it is a big part
of what makes carbon pollution such a stubborn problem: we can’t see it, so we
don’t really believe it exists. Ours is a culture of disavowal, of simultaneously
knowing and not knowing—the illusion of proximity coupled with the reality of
distance is the trick perfected by the fossil-fueled global market. So we both
know and don’t know who makes our goods, who cleans up after us, where our
waste disappears to—whether it’s our sewage or electronics or our carbon
emissions.
But what Nauru’s fate tells us is that there is no middle of nowhere, nowhere
that doesn’t “count”—and that nothing ever truly disappears. On some level we
all know this, that we are part of a swirling web of connections. Yet we are
trapped in linear narratives that tell us the opposite: that we can expand
infinitely, that there will always be more space to absorb our waste, more
resources to fuel our wants, more people to abuse.
These days, Nauru is in a near constant state of political crisis, with fresh
corruption scandals perpetually threatening to bring down the government, and
sometimes succeeding. Given the wrong visited upon the nation, the island’s
leaders would be well within their rights to point fingers outward—at their
former colonial masters who flayed them, at the investors who fleeced them,

and at the rich countries whose emissions now threaten to drown them. And
some do. But several of Nauru’s leaders have also chosen to do something else:
to hold up their country as a kind of warning to a warming world.
In The New York Times in 2011, for instance, then-president Marcus Stephen
wrote that Nauru provides “an indispensable cautionary tale about life in a place
with hard ecological limits.” It shows, he claimed, “what can happen when a
country runs out of options. The world is headed down a similar path with the
relentless burning of coal and oil, which is altering the planet’s climate, melting
ice caps, making oceans more acidic and edging us ever closer to a day when no
one will be able to take clean water, fertile soil or abundant food for granted.” In
other words, Nauru isn’t the only one digging itself to death; we all are.22
But the lesson Nauru has to teach is not only about the dangers of fossil fuel
emissions. It is about the mentality that allowed so many of us, and our
ancestors, to believe that we could relate to the earth with such violence in the
first place—to dig and drill out the substances we desired while thinking little of
the trash left behind, whether in the land and water where the extraction takes
place, or in the atmosphere, once the extracted material is burned. This
carelessness is at the core of an economic model some political scientists call
“extractivism,” a term originally used to describe economies based on removing
ever more raw materials from the earth, usually for export to traditional colonial
powers, where “value” was added. And it’s a habit of thought that goes a long
way toward explaining why an economic model based on endless growth ever
seemed viable in the first place. Though developed under capitalism,
governments across the ideological spectrum now embrace this resourcedepleting model as a road to development, and it is this logic that climate
change calls profoundly into question.
Extractivism is a nonreciprocal, dominance-based relationship with the
earth, one purely of taking. It is the opposite of stewardship, which involves
taking but also taking care that regeneration and future life continue.
Extractivism is the mentality of the mountaintop remover and the old-growth
clear-cutter. It is the reduction of life into objects for the use of others, giving
them no integrity or value of their own—turning living complex ecosystems
into “natural resources,” mountains into “overburden” (as the mining industry
terms the forests, rocks, and streams that get in the way of its bulldozers). It is
also the reduction of human beings either into labor to be brutally extracted,
pushed beyond limits, or, alternatively, into social burden, problems to be
locked out at borders and locked away in prisons or reservations. In an

extractivist economy, the interconnections among these various objectified
components of life are ignored; the consequences of severing them are of no
concern.
Extractivism is also directly connected to the notion of sacrifice zones—
places that, to their extractors, somehow don’t count and therefore can be
poisoned, drained, or otherwise destroyed, for the supposed greater good of
economic progress. This toxic idea has always been intimately tied to
imperialism, with disposable peripheries being harnessed to feed a glittering
center, and it is bound up too with notions of racial superiority, because in order
to have sacrifice zones, you need to have people and cultures who count so little
that they are considered deserving of sacrifice. Extractivism ran rampant under
colonialism because relating to the world as a frontier of conquest—rather than
as home—fosters this particular brand of irresponsibility. The colonial mind
nurtures the belief that there is always somewhere else to go to and exploit once
the current site of extraction has been exhausted.
These ideas predate industrial-scale extraction of fossil fuels. And yet the
ability to harness the power of coal to power factories and ships is what, more
than any single other factor, enabled these dangerous ideas to conquer the
world. It’s a history worth exploring in more depth, because it goes a long way
toward explaining how the climate crisis challenges not only capitalism but the
underlying civilizational narratives about endless growth and progress within
which we are all, in one way or another, still trapped.

The Ultimate Extractivist Relationship
If the modern-day extractive economy has a patron saint, the honor should
probably go to Francis Bacon. The English philosopher, scientist, and statesman
is credited with convincing Britain’s elites to abandon, once and for all, pagan
notions of the earth as a life-giving mother figure to whom we owe respect and
reverence (and more than a little fear) and accept the role as her dungeon
master. “For you have but to follow and as it were hound nature in her
wanderings,” Bacon wrote in De Augmentis Scientiarum in 1623, “and you will be
able, when you like, to lead and drive her afterwards to the same place again. . . .
Neither ought a man to make scruple of entering and penetrating into these
holes and corners, when the inquisition of truth is his sole object.”23 (Not

surprisingly, feminist scholars have filled volumes analyzing the ex–Lord
Chancellor’s metaphor choices.)
These ideas of a completely knowable and controllable earth animated not
only the Scientific Revolution but, critically, the colonial project as well, which
sent ships crisscrossing the globe to poke and prod and bring the secrets, and
wealth, back to their respective crowns. The mood of human invincibility that
governed this epoch was neatly encapsulated in the words of clergyman and
philosopher William Derham in his 1713 book Physico-Theology: “We can, if
need be, ransack the whole globe, penetrate into the bowels of the earth,
descend to the bottom of the deep, travel to the farthest regions of this world, to
acquire wealth.”24
And yet despite this bravado, throughout the 1700s, the twin projects of
colonialism and industrialization were still constrained by nature on several key
fronts. Ships carrying both slaves and the raw materials they harvested could sail
only when winds were favorable, which could lead to long delays in the supply
chain. The factories that turned those raw materials into finished products were
powered by huge water wheels. They needed to be located next to waterfalls or
rapids which made them dependent on the flow and levels of rivers. As with
high or low winds at sea, an especially dry or wet spell meant that working hours
in the textile, flour, and sugar mills had to be adjusted accordingly—a mounting
annoyance as markets expanded and became more global.
Many water-powered factories were, by necessity, spread out around the
countryside, near bodies of fast-moving water. As the Industrial Revolution
matured and workers in the mills started to strike and even riot for better wages
and conditions, this decentralization made factory owners highly vulnerable,
since quickly finding replacement workers in rural areas was difficult.
Beginning in 1776, a Scottish engineer named James Watt perfected and
manufactured a power source that offered solutions to all these vulnerabilities.
Lawyer and historian Barbara Freese describes Watt’s steam engine as “perhaps
the most important invention in the creation of the modern world”—and with
good reason.25 By adding a separate condenser, air pump, and later a rotary
mechanism to an older model, Watt was able to make the coal-fired steam
engine vastly more powerful and adaptable than its predecessors. In contrast, the
new machines could power a broad range of industrial operations, including,
eventually, boats.
For the first couple of decades, the new engine was a tough sell. Water power,
after all, had a lot going for it compared with coal. For one thing, it was free,

while coal needed to be continually re-purchased. And contrary to the
widespread belief that the steam engine provided more energy than water
wheels, the two were actually comparable, with the larger wheels packing
several times more horsepower than their coal-powered rivals. Water wheels
also operated more smoothly, with fewer technical breakdowns, so long as the
water was flowing. “The transition from water to steam in the British cotton
industry did not occur because water was scarce, less powerful, or more
expensive than steam,” writes Swedish coal expert Andreas Malm. “To the
contrary, steam gained supremacy in spite of water being abundant, at least as
powerful, and decidedly cheaper.”26
As Britain’s urban population ballooned, two factors tipped the balance in
favor of the steam engine. The first was the new machine’s insulation from
nature’s fluctuations: unlike water wheels, steam engines worked at the same
rate all the time, so long as there was coal to feed them and the machinery
wasn’t broken. The flow rates of rivers were of no concern. Steam engines also
worked anywhere, regardless of the geography, which meant that factory owners
could shift production from more remote areas to cities like London,
Manchester, and Lancaster, where there were gluts of willing industrial workers,
making it far easier to fire troublemakers and put down strikes. As an 1832
article written by a British economist explained, “The invention of the steamengine has relieved us from the necessity of building factories in inconvenient
situations merely for the sake of a waterfall.” Or as one of Watt’s early
biographers put it, the generation of power “will no longer depend, as
heretofore, on the most inconstant of natural causes—on atmospheric
influences.”27
Similarly, when Watt’s engine was installed in a boat, ship crews were
liberated from having to adapt their journeys to the winds, a development that
rapidly accelerated the colonial project and the ability of European powers to
easily annex countries in distant lands. As the Earl of Liverpool put it in a
public meeting to memorialize James Watt in 1824, “Be the winds friendly or be
they contrary, the power of the Steam Engine overcomes all difficulties. . . . Let
the wind blow from whatever quarter it may, let the destination of our force be
to whatever part of the world it may, you have the power and the means, by the
Steam Engine, of applying that force at the proper time and in the proper
manner.”28 Not until the advent of electronic trading would commerce feel
itself so liberated from the constraints of living on a planet bound by geography
and governed by the elements.

Unlike the energy it replaced, power from fossil fuel always required sacrifice
zones—whether in the black lungs of the coal miners or the poisoned waterways
surrounding the mines. But these prices were seen as worth paying in exchange
for coal’s intoxicating promise of freedom from the physical world—a freedom
that unleashed industrial capitalism’s full force to dominate both workers and
other cultures. With their portable energy creator, the industrialists and
colonists of the 1800s could now go wherever labor was cheapest and most
exploitable, and wherever resources were most plentiful and valuable. As the
author of a steam engine manual wrote in the mid-1830s, “Its mighty services
are always at our command, whether in winter or in summer, by day or by night
—it knows of no intermission but what our wishes dictate.”29 Coal represented,
in short, total domination, of both nature and other people, the full realization
of Bacon’s dream at last. “Nature can be conquered,” Watt reportedly said, “if
we can but find her weak side.”30
Little wonder then that the introduction of Watt’s steam engine coincided
with explosive levels of growth in British manufacturing, such that in the eighty
years between 1760 and 1840, the country went from importing 2.5 million
pounds of raw cotton to importing 366 million pounds of raw cotton, a genuine
revolution made possible by the potent and brutal combination of coal at home
and slave labor abroad.31
This recipe produced more than just new consumer products. In Ecological
Economics, Herman Daly and Joshua Farley point out that Adam Smith
published The Wealth of Nations in 1776—the same year that Watt produced his
first commercial steam engine. “It is no coincidence,” they write, “that the
market economy and fossil fuel economy emerged at essentially the exact same
time. . . . New technologies and vast amounts of fossil energy allowed
unprecedented production of consumer goods. The need for new markets for
these mass-produced consumer goods and new sources of raw material played a
role in colonialism and the pursuit of empire. The market economy evolved as
an efficient way of allocating such goods, and stimulating the production of
even more.”32 Just as colonialism needed coal to fulfill its dream of total
domination, the deluge of products made possible by both coal and colonialism
needed modern capitalism.
The promise of liberation from nature that Watt was selling in those early
days continues to be the great power of fossil fuels. That power is what allows
today’s multinationals to scour the globe for the cheapest, most exploitable
workforce, with natural features and events that once appeared as obstacles—

vast oceans, treacherous landscapes, seasonal fluctuations—no longer even
registering as minor annoyances. Or so it seemed for a time.
It is often said that Mother Nature bats last, and this has been poignantly the
case for some of the men who were most possessed by the ambition of
conquering her. A perhaps apocryphal story surrounds the death of Francis
Bacon: in an attempt to test his hypothesis that frozen meat could be prevented
from rotting, he traipsed around in chilly weather stuffing a chicken full of
snow. As a result, it is said, the philosopher caught pneumonia, which
eventually led to his demise.33 Despite some controversy, the anecdote survives
for its seeming poetic justice: a man who thought nature could be bent to his
will died from simple exposure to the cold.
A similar story of comeuppance appears to be unfolding for the human race
as a whole. Ralph Waldo Emerson called coal “a portable climate”—and it has
been a smash success, carrying countless advantages, from longer life spans to
hundreds of millions freed from hard labor.34 And yet precisely because our
bodies are so effectively separated from our geographies, we who have access to
this privilege have proven ourselves far too capable of ignoring the fact that we
aren’t just changing our personal climate but the entire planet’s climate as well,
warming not just the indoors but the outdoors too. And yet the warming is no
less real for our failure to pay attention.
The harnessing of fossil fuel power seemed, for a couple of centuries at least,
to have freed large parts of humanity from the need to be in constant dialogue
with nature, having to adjust its plans, ambitions, and schedules to natural
fluctuations and topographies. Coal and oil, precisely because they were
fossilized, seemed entirely possessable forms of energy. They did not behave
independently—not like wind, or water, or, for that matter, workers. Just as
Watt’s engine promised, once purchased, they produced power wherever and
whenever their owners wished—the ultimate nonreciprocal relationship.
But what we have learned from atmospheric science is that the give-andtake, call-and-response that is the essence of all relationships in nature was not
eliminated with fossil fuels, it was merely delayed, all the while gaining force
and velocity. Now the cumulative effect of those centuries of burned carbon is
in the process of unleashing the most ferocious natural tempers of all.
As a result, the illusion of total power and control Watt and his cohorts once
peddled has given way to the reality of near total powerlessness and loss of

control in the face of such spectacular forces as Hurricane Sandy and Typhoon
Haiyan. Which is just one of the reasons climate change is so deeply
frightening. Because to confront this crisis truthfully is to confront ourselves—
to reckon, as our ancestors did, with our vulnerability to the elements that make
up both the planet and our bodies. It is to accept (even embrace) being but one
porous part of the world, rather than its master or machinist, as Bacon long ago
promised. There can be great well-being in that realization of interconnection,
pleasure too. But we should not underestimate the depth of the civilizational
challenge that this relationship represents. As Australian political scientist
Clive Hamilton puts it, facing these truths about climate change “means
recognizing that the power relation between humans and the earth is the reverse
of the one we have assumed for three centuries.”35
For one of those centuries, a huge white marble statue of James Watt
dominated St. Paul’s chapel in Westminster Abbey, commemorating a man who
“enlarged the resources of his Country” and “increased the power of Man.” And
Watt certainly did that: his engine massively accelerated the Industrial
Revolution and the steamships his engine made possible subsequently opened
sub-Saharan Africa and India to colonial pillage. So while making Europe
richer, he also helped make many other parts of the world poorer, carbon-fueled
inequalities that persist to this day. Indeed, coal was the black ink in which the
story of modern capitalism was written.
But all the facts were not yet in when Watt was being memorialized in
marble in 1825. Because it is the cumulative impact of the carbon emissions
that began in those early mills and mines that has already engraved itself in the
geologic record—in the levels of the oceans, in their chemical composition, in
the slow erasure of islands like Nauru; in the retreat of glaciers, the collapse of
ice shelves, the thawing of permafrost; in the disturbed soil cycles and in the
charred forests.
Indeed, it turns out that coal’s earliest casualties—the miners who died from
black lung, the workers in the Satanic Mills—were not merely the price of
progress. They were also an early warning that we were unleashing a poisonous
substance onto the world. “It has become clear over the last century,” writes
Ecuadorian ecologist Esperanza Martínez, “that fossil fuels, the energy sources of
capitalism, destroy life—from the territories where they are extracted to the
oceans and the atmosphere that absorb the waste.”36
Jean-Paul Sartre called fossil fuels “capital bequeathed to mankind by other
living beings”; they are quite literally the decayed remnants of long-dead life-

forms. It’s not that these substances are evil; it’s just that they belong where
they are: in the ground, where they are performing valuable ecological
functions. Coal, when left alone, helpfully sequesters not just the carbon long
ago pulled out of the air by plants, but all kinds of other toxins. It acts, as worldrenowned Australian climate scientist Tim Flannery puts it, like “a natural
sponge that absorbs many substances dissolved in groundwater, from uranium to
cadmium and mercury.”37
When coal is dug up and burned, however, those toxins are released in the
ecosystem, eventually making their way into the oceans, where they are
absorbed by krill and plankton, then by fish, and then by us. The released
carbon, meanwhile, enters the atmosphere, causing global warming (not to
mention coal’s contribution to the smog and particulate pollution that have
plagued urban society since the Industrial Revolution, afflicting untold numbers
of people with respiratory, heart, and other diseases).
Given this legacy, our task is not small, but it is simple: rather than a society
of grave robbers, we need to become a society of life amplifiers, deriving our
energy directly from the elements that sustain life. It’s time to let the dead rest.

The Extractivist Left
The braided historical threads of colonialism, coal, and capitalism shed
significant light on why so many of us who are willing to challenge the
injustices of the market system remain paralyzed in the face of the climate
threat. Fossil fuels, and the deeper extractivist mind-set that they represent,
built the modern world. If we are part of industrial or postindustrial societies, we
are still living inside the story written in coal.
Ever since the French Revolution, there have been pitched ideological
battles within the confines of this story: communists, socialists, and trade unions
have fought for more equal distribution of the spoils of extraction, winning
major victories for the poor and working classes. And the human rights and
emancipation movements of this period have also fought valiantly against
industrial capitalism’s treatment of whole categories of our species as human
sacrifice zones, no more deserving of rights than raw commodities. These
struggles have also won major victories against the dominance-based paradigm
—against slavery, for universal suffrage, for equality under the law. And there
have been voices in all of these movements, moreover, that identified the

parallels between the economic model’s abuse of the natural world and its abuse
of human beings deemed worthy of being sacrificed, or at least uncounted. Karl
Marx, for instance, recognized capitalism’s “irreparable rift” with “the natural
laws of life itself,” while feminist scholars have long recognized that patriarchy’s
dual war against women’s bodies and against the body of the earth were
connected to that essential, corrosive separation between mind and body—and
between body and earth—from which both the Scientific Revolution and
Industrial Revolution sprang.38
These challenges, however, were mainly in the intellectual realm; Bacon’s
original, biblically inspired framework remained largely intact—the right of
humans to place ourselves above the ecosystems that support us and to abuse the
earth as if it were an inanimate machine. The strongest challenges to this
worldview have always come from outside its logic, in those historical junctures
when the extractive project clashes directly with a different, older way of
relating to the earth—and that older way fights back. This has been true from
the earliest days of industrialization, when English and Irish peasants, for
instance, revolted against the first attempts to enclose communal lands, and it
has continued in clashes between colonizers and Indigenous peoples through the
centuries, right up to—as we will see—the Indigenous-led resistance to extreme
fossil fuel extraction gaining power today.
But for those of us born and raised inside this system, though we may well see
the dead-end flaw of its central logic, it can remain intensely difficult to see a
way out. And how could it be otherwise? Post-Enlightenment Western culture
does not offer a road map for how to live that is not based on an extractivist,
nonreciprocal relationship with nature.
This is where the right-wing climate deniers have overstated their conspiracy
theories about what a cosmic gift global warming is to the left. It is true, as I
have outlined, that many climate responses reinforce progressive support for
government intervention in the market, for greater equality, and for a more
robust public sphere. But the deeper message carried by the ecological crisis—
that humanity has to go a whole lot easier on the living systems that sustain us,
acting regeneratively rather than extractively—is a profound challenge to large
parts of the left as well as the right. It’s a challenge to some trade unions, those
trying to freeze in place the dirtiest jobs, instead of fighting for the good clean
jobs their members deserve. And it’s a challenge to the overwhelming majority
of center-left Keynesians, who still define economic success in terms of
traditional measures of GDP growth, regardless of whether that growth comes

from rampant resource extraction. (This is all the more baffling because Keynes
himself, like John Stuart Mill, advocated a transition to a post-growth
economy.)
It’s a challenge, too, to those parts of the left that equated socialism with the
authoritarian rule of the Soviet Union and its satellites (though there was
always a rich tradition, particularly among anarchists, that considered Stalin’s
project an abomination of core social justice principles). Because the fact is that
those self-described socialist states devoured resources with as much enthusiasm
as their capitalist counterparts, and spewed waste just as recklessly. Before the
fall of the Berlin Wall, for instance, Czechs and Russians had even higher
carbon footprints per capita than Canadians and Australians. Which is why one
of the only times the developed world has seen a precipitous emissions drop was
after the economic collapse of the former Soviet Union in the early 1990s. Mao
Zedong, for his part, openly declared that “man must conquer nature,” setting
loose a devastating onslaught on the natural world that transitioned seamlessly
from clear-cuts under communism to mega-dams under capitalism. Russia’s oil
and gas companies, meanwhile, were as reckless and accident-prone under state
socialist control as they are today in the hands of the oligarchs and Russia’s
corporatist state.39
And why wouldn’t they be? Authoritarian socialism and capitalism share
strong tendencies toward centralizing (one in the hands of the state, the other
in the hands of corporations). They also both keep their respective systems
going through ruthless expansion—whether through production for production’s
sake, in the case of Soviet-era socialism, or consumption for consumption’s sake,
in the case of consumer capitalism.
One possible bright spot is Scandinavian-style Social Democracy, which has
undoubtedly produced some of the most significant green breakthroughs in the
world, from the visionary urban design of Stockholm, where roughly 74 percent
of residents walk, bike, or take public transit to work, to Denmark’s communitycontrolled wind power revolution. And yet Norway’s late-life emergence as a
major oil producer—with majority state-owned Statoil tearing up the Alberta
tar sands and gearing up to tap massive reserves in the Arctic—calls into
question whether these countries are indeed charting a path away from
extractivism.40
In Latin America and Africa, moving away from overdependence on raw
resource extraction and export, and toward more diversified economies, has
always been a central piece of the postcolonial project. And yet some countries

where left and center-left governments have come to power over the last decade
are moving in the opposite direction. The fact that this tendency is little
discussed outside the continent should not be surprising. Progressives around the
world have rightfully cheered Latin America’s electoral “pink tide,” with
government after government coming to power promising to reduce inequality,
tackle extreme poverty, and take back control over the extractive industries of
their respective countries. And purely from the perspective of poverty
reduction, the results have often been stunning.
Since the election of Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, and now under the leadership
of his former chief of staff, Dilma Rousseff, Brazil has reduced its extreme
poverty rate by 65 percent in a single decade, according to the government.
More than thirty million people have been lifted out of poverty. After the
election of Hugo Chávez, Venezuela slashed the percentage of the population
living in extreme poverty by more than half—from 16.6 percent in 1999 to 7
percent in 2011, according to government statistics. College enrollment has
doubled since 2004. Ecuador under Rafael Correa has dropped its poverty rates
by 32 per cent, according to the World Bank. In Argentina, urban poverty
plummeted from 54.7 percent in 2003 to 6.5 percent in 2011, according to
government data collected by the U.N.41
Bolivia’s record, under the presidency of Evo Morales, is also impressive. It
has reduced the proportion of its population living in extreme poverty from 38
percent in 2005 to 21.6 percent in 2012, according to government figures.42
And unemployment rates have been cut in half. Most importantly, while other
developing countries have used growth to create societies of big winners and big
losers, Bolivia is actually succeeding in building a more equal society. Alicia
Bárcena Ibarra, executive secretary of the U.N. Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean, observes that in Bolivia “the gap between rich and
poor has been hugely narrowed.”43
All of this is a marked improvement over what came before, when the wealth
extracted from each of these countries was overwhelmingly concentrated among
a tiny elite, with far too much of it fleeing the continent entirely. And yet these
left and center-left governments have so far been unable to come up with
economic models that do not require extremely high levels of extraction of
finite resources, often at tremendous ecological and human cost. This is true for
Ecuador, with its growing oil dependence, including oil from the Amazon;
Bolivia, with its huge dependence on natural gas; Argentina, with its continued
support for open-pit mining and its “green deserts” of genetically modified soy

and other crops; Brazil, with its highly contentious mega-dams and forays into
high-risk offshore oil drilling; and of course it has always been the case for petrodependent Venezuela. Moreover, most of these governments have made very
little progress on the old dream of diversifying their economies away from raw
resource exports—in fact, between 2004 and 2011, raw resources as a percentage
of overall exports increased in all of these countries except Argentina, though
some of this increase was no doubt due to rising commodity prices. It hasn’t
helped that China has been throwing easy credit around the continent, in some
cases demanding to be paid back in oil.44
This reliance on high risk and ecologically damaging forms of extraction is
particularly disappointing in the governments of Evo Morales in Bolivia and
Rafael Correa in Ecuador. In their first terms, both had signaled that a new,
nonextractive chapter was beginning in their countries. Part of this involved
granting real respect to the Indigenous cultures that had survived centuries of
marginalization and oppression and that form powerful political constituencies
in both countries. Under Morales and Correa, the Indigenous concepts of sumak
kawsay and buen vivir, which strive to build societies in harmony with nature (in
which everyone has enough, rather than more and more), became the discourse
of government, even recognized in law. But in both cases, escalating industrialscale development and extraction has overtaken this promising rhetoric.
According to Ecuador’s Esperanza Martínez, “Since 2007, Correa’s has been the
most extractivist government in the history of the country, in terms of oil and
now also mining.” Indeed Latin American intellectuals have invented a new
term to describe what they are experiencing: “progressive extractivism.”45
The governments claim they have no choice—that they need to pursue
extractive policies in order to pay for programs that alleviate poverty. And in
many ways this explanation comes back to the question of climate debt: Bolivia
and Ecuador have been at the forefront of the coalition of governments asking
that the countries responsible for the bulk of historical greenhouse gas emissions
help to pay for the Global South’s transition away from dirty energy and toward
low-carbon development. These calls have been alternatively ignored and
dismissed. Forced to choose between poverty and pollution, these governments
are choosing pollution, but those should not be their only options.
The default overreliance on dirty extraction is not only a problem for
progressives in the developing world. In Greece in May 2013, for instance, I was
surprised to discover that the left-wing Syriza party—then the country’s official
opposition and held up by many progressive Europeans as the great hope for a

real political alternative on the continent—did not oppose the governing
coalition’s embrace of new oil and gas exploration. Instead, it argued that any
funds raised by the effort should be spent on pensions, not used to pay back
creditors. In other words: they were not providing an alternative to extractivism
but simply had better plans for distributing the spoils.
Far from seeing climate change as an opportunity to argue for their socialist
utopia, as conservative climate change deniers fear, Syriza had simply stopped
talking about global warming altogether.
This is something that the party’s leader, Alexis Tsipras, admitted to me
quite openly in an interview: “We were a party that had the environment and
climate change in the center of our interest,” he said. “But after these years of
depression in Greece, we forgot climate change.”46 At least he was honest.
The good news, and it is significant, is that large and growing social
movements in all of these countries are pushing back against the idea that
extraction-and-redistribution is the only route out of poverty and economic
crisis. There are massive movements against gold mining in Greece, so large
that Syriza has become a significant opponent of the mines. In Latin America,
meanwhile, progressive governments are increasingly finding themselves in
direct conflict with many of the people who elected them, facing accusations
that their new model of what Hugo Chávez called “Twenty-first-Century
Socialism” simply isn’t new enough. Huge hydro dams in Brazil, highways
through sensitive areas in Bolivia, and oil drilling in the Ecuadorian Amazon
have all become internal flashpoints. Yes, the wealth is better distributed,
particularly among the urban poor, but outside the cities, the ways of life of
Indigenous peoples and peasants are still being endangered without their
consent, and they are still being made landless by ecosystem destruction. What
is needed, writes Bolivian environmentalist Patricia Molina, is a new definition
of development, “so that the goal is the elimination of poverty, and not of the
poor.”47
This critique represents more than just the push and pull of politics; it is a
fundamental shift in the way an increasingly large and vocal political
constituency views the goal of economic activity and the meaning of
development. Space is opening up for a growing influence of Indigenous
thought on new generations of activists, beginning, most significantly, with
Mexico’s Zapatista uprising in 1994, and continuing, as we will see, with the
important leadership role that Indigenous land-rights movements are playing in
pivotal anti-extraction struggles in North America, Latin America, Australia,

and New Zealand. In part through these struggles, non-Indigenous progressive
movements are being exposed to worldviews based on relationships of
reciprocity and interconnection with the natural world that are the antithesis of
extractivism. These movements have truly heard the message of climate change
and are winning battles to keep significant amounts of carbon in the ground.

Some Warnings, Unheeded
There is one other group that might have provided a challenge to Western
culture’s disastrous view of nature as a bottomless vending machine. That group,
of course, is the environmental movement, the network of organizations that
exists to protect the natural world from being devoured by human activity. And
yet the movement has not played this role, at least not in a sustained and
coherent manner.
In part, that has to do with the movement’s unusually elite history,
particularly in North America. When conservationism emerged as a powerful
force in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, it was primarily about
men of privilege who enjoyed fishing, hunting, camping, and hiking and who
recognized that many of their favorite wilderness spots were under threat from
the rapid expansion of industrialization. For the most part, these men did not
call into question the frenetic economic project that was devouring natural
landscapes all over the continent—they simply wanted to make sure that some
particularly spectacular pockets were set aside for their recreation and aesthetic
appreciation. Like the Christian missionaries who traveled with traders and
soldiers, most early preservationists saw their work as a civilizing addendum to
the colonial and industrial projects—not as a challenge to them. Writing in
1914, Bronx Zoo director William Temple Hornaday summed up this ethos,
urging American educators to “take up their share of the white man’s burden”
and help to “preserve the wild life of our country.”48
This task was accomplished not with disruptive protests, which would have
been unseemly for a movement so entrenched in the upper stratum of society.
Instead, it was achieved through quiet lobbying, with well-bred men appealing
to the noblesse oblige of other men of their class to save a cherished area by
turning it into a national or state park, or a private family preserve—often at the
direct expense of Indigenous people who lost access to these lands as hunting
and fishing grounds.

There were those in the movement, however, who saw in the threats to their
country’s most beautiful places signs of a deeper cultural crisis. For instance,
John Muir, the great naturalist writer who helped found the Sierra Club in
1892, excoriated the industrialists who dammed wild rivers and drowned
beautiful valleys. To him they were heathens—“devotees of ravaging
commercialism” who “instead of lifting their eyes to the God of the mountains,
lift them to the Almighty Dollar.”49
He was not the only heretic. A strain of radicalism drove some of the early
Western ecological thinkers to argue for doing more than protecting isolated
landscapes. Though frequently unacknowledged, these thinkers often drew
heavily on Eastern beliefs about the interconnectedness of all life, as well as on
Native American cosmologies that see all living creatures as our “relations.”
In the mid-1800s, Henry David Thoreau wrote that, “The earth I tread on is
not a dead, inert mass. It is a body, has a spirit, is organic, and fluid to the
influence of its spirit, and to whatever particle of that spirit is in me.”I This was
a straight repudiation of Francis Bacon’s casting of the earth as an inert machine
whose mysteries could be mastered by the human mind. And almost a century
after Thoreau, Aldo Leopold, whose book A Sand County Almanac was the
touchstone for a second wave of environmentalists, similarly called for an ethic
that “enlarges the boundaries of the community to include soils, waters, plants,
and animals” and that recognizes “the individual is a member of a community of
interdependent parts.” A “land ethic,” as he called it, “changes the role of Homo
sapiens from conqueror of the land-community to plain member and citizen of it.
It implies respect for his fellow-members, and also respect for the community as
such.”50
These ideas were hugely influential in the evolution of ecological thought,
but unattached to populist movements, they posed little threat to galloping
industrialization. The dominant worldview continued to see humans as a
conquering army, subduing and mechanizing the natural world. Even so, by the
1930s, with socialism on the rise around the world, the more conservative
elements of the growing environmental movement sought to distance
themselves from Leopold’s “radical” suggestion that nature had an inherent
value beyond its utility to man. If watersheds and old-growth forests had a “right
to continued existence,” as Leopold argued (a preview of the “rights of nature”
debates that would emerge several decades later), then an owner’s right to do
what he wished with his land could be called into question. In 1935, Jay
Norwood “Ding” Darling, who would later help found the National Wildlife

Federation, wrote to Leopold warning him, “I can’t get away from the idea that
you are getting us out into water over our depth by your new philosophy of
wildlife environment. The end of that road leads to socialization of property.”51
By the time Rachel Carson published Silent Spring in 1962, the attempts to
turn nature into a mere cog in the American industrial machine had grown so
aggressive, so overtly militaristic, that it was no longer possible to pretend that
combining capitalism with conservation was simply a matter of protecting a few
pockets of green. Carson’s book boiled over with righteous condemnations of a
chemical industry that used aerial bombardment to wipe out insects,
thoughtlessly endangering human and animal life in the process. The marine
biologist-turned-social-critic painted a vivid picture of the arrogant “control
men” who, enthralled with “a bright new toy,” hurled poisons “against the fabric
of life.”52
Carson’s focus was DDT, but for her the problem was not a particular
chemical; it was a logic. “The ‘control of nature,’ ” Carson wrote, “is a phrase
conceived in arrogance, born of the Neanderthal age of biology and philosophy,
when it was supposed that nature exists for the convenience of man. . . . It is our
alarming misfortune that so primitive a science has armed itself with the most
modern and terrible weapons, and that in turning them against the insects it has
also turned them against the earth.”53
Carson’s writing inspired a new, much more radical generation of
environmentalists to see themselves as part of a fragile planetary ecosystem
rather than as its engineers or mechanics, giving birth to the field of Ecological
Economics. It was in this context that the underlying logic of extractivism—
that there would always be more earth for us to consume—began to be forcefully
challenged within the mainstream. The pinnacle of this debate came in 1972
when the Club of Rome published The Limits to Growth, a runaway best-seller
that used early computer models to predict that if natural systems continued to
be depleted at their current rate, humanity would overshoot the planet’s
carrying capacity by the middle of the twenty-first century. Saving a few
beautiful mountain ranges wouldn’t be enough to get us out of this fix; the logic
of growth itself needed to be confronted.
As author Christian Parenti observed recently of the book’s lasting influence,
“Limits combined the glamour of Big Science—powerful MIT computers and
support from the Smithsonian Institution—with a focus on the
interconnectedness of things, which fit perfectly with the new countercultural
zeitgeist.” And though some of the book’s projections have not held up over

time—the authors underestimated, for instance, the capacity of profit incentives
and innovative technologies to unlock new reserves of finite resources—Limits
was right about the most important limit of all. On “the limits of natural ‘sinks,’
or the Earth’s ability to absorb pollution,” Parenti writes, “the catastrophically
bleak vision of Limits is playing out as totally correct. We may find new inputs—
more oil or chromium—or invent substitutes, but we have not produced or
discovered more natural sinks. The Earth’s capacity to absorb the filthy
byproducts of global capitalism’s voracious metabolism is maxing out. That
warning has always been the most powerful part of The Limits to Growth.”54
And yet in the most powerful parts of the environmental movement, in the
key decades during which we have been confronting the climate threat, these
voices of warning have gone unheeded. The movement did not reckon with
limits of growth in an economic system built on maximizing profits, it instead
tried to prove that saving the planet could be a great new business opportunity.
The reasons for this political timidity have plenty to do with the themes
already discussed: the power and allure of free market logic that usurped so
much intellectual life in the late 1980s and 1990s, including large parts of the
conservation movement. But this persistent unwillingness to follow science to
its conclusions also speaks to the power of the cultural narrative that tells us
that humans are ultimately in control of the earth, and not the other way
around. This is the same narrative that assures us that, however bad things get,
we are going to be saved at the last minute—whether by the market, by
philanthropic billionaires, or by technological wizards—or best of all, by all
three at the same time. And while we wait, we keep digging in deeper.
Only when we dispense with these various forms of magical thinking will we
be ready to leave extractivism behind and build the societies we need within the
boundaries we have—a world with no sacrifice zones, no new Naurus.

I. “In the morning I bathe my intellect in the stupendous and cosmogonal philosophy of the Bhagvat
Geeta,” wrote Thoreau in Walden of the famous Indian scripture. He continued, “I lay down the book and
go to my well for water and lo! there I meet the servant of the Brahmin, priest of Brahma and Vishnu and
Indra, who still sits in his temple on the Ganges reading the Vedas, or dwells at the root of a tree with his
crust and water jug. . . . The pure Walden water is mingled with the sacred water of the Ganges.”

PART TWO

MAGICAL THINKING
“Vast economic incentives exist to invent pills that would cure alcoholism or drug
addiction, and much snake oil gets peddled claiming to provide such benefits. Yet
substance abuse has not disappeared from society. Given the addiction of modern
civilization to cheap energy, the parallel ought to be unnerving to anyone who believes that
technology alone will allow us to pull the climate rabbit out of the fossil-fuel hat. . . . The
hopes that many Greens place in a technological fix are an expression of high-modernist
faith in the unlimited power of science and technology as profound—and as rational—as
Augustine’s faith in Christ.”
—Political scientist William Barnes and intellectual historian Nils Gilman, 20111

“The leaders of the largest environmental groups in the country have become all too
comfortable jet-setting with their handpicked corporate board members, a lifestyle they owe
to those same corporate moguls. So it is little wonder that instead of prodding their
benefactors to do better, these leaders—always hungry for the next donation—heap praise
on every corporate half measure and at every photo opportunity.”
—Christine MacDonald, former employee of Conservation International, 20082

6

FRUITS, NOT ROOTS
The Disastrous Merger of Big Business and Big Green
“Our arguments must translate into profits, earnings, productivity, and economic incentives
for industry.”
—Former National Wildlife Federation President Jay Hair, 19871

“I know this seems antithetical, but the bottom line here is not whether new coal-fired
plants are built. . . . If the new coal plants are coming online under a cap that is bringing
total emissions down, then it is not the worst thing in the world. Coal isn’t the enemy.
Carbon emissions are.”
—Environmental Defense Fund President Fred Krupp, 20092

Before the twentieth century, as many as a million Attwater’s prairie chickens
made their homes in the tall grasses along the coasts of Texas and Louisiana.3
During mating season, they were quite a spectacle. To attract females, the males
stomped their feet in little staccato motions, made loud, spooky cooing noises
(known as “booming”), and inflated bright yellow air sacs on the sides of their
necks, giving them the appearance of having swallowed two golden eggs.
But as the native prairie was turned into subdivisions and sliced up by oil and
gas development, the Attwater’s prairie chicken population began to crash.
Local birders mourned the loss and in 1965, The Nature Conservancy—
renowned for buying up ecologically important tracts of land and turning them
into preserves—opened a Texas chapter. Early on, one of its major priorities was
saving the Attwater’s prairie chicken from extinction.4
It wasn’t going to be easy, even for what would become the richest
environmental organization in the world. One of the last remaining breeding

grounds was located on 2,303 acres in southeast Texas on the shore of
Galveston Bay, a property that happened to be owned by Mobil (now
ExxonMobil). The fossil fuel giant hadn’t yet covered the land in oil and gas
infrastructure, but there were active wells on its southern edge, closing in on the
breeding grounds of the endangered bird. Then in 1995, came some surprisingly
good news. Mobil was donating its Galveston Bay property to The Nature
Conservancy —“the last best hope of saving one of the world’s most endangered
species,” as the company put it. The conservancy, which named the land the
Texas City Prairie Preserve, would make “the recovery of the Attwater’s prairie
chicken” its “highest priority.” To all appearances, it was a shining conservation
success story—proof that a nonconfrontational, partnership-based approach to
environmentalism could yield tangible results.5
But four years later, something very strange happened. The Nature
Conservancy began to do the very thing that its supporters thought it was there
to prevent: it began extracting fossil fuels on the preserve. In 1999, the
conservancy commissioned an oil and gas operator to sink a new gas well inside
the preserve, which would send millions in revenue flowing directly into the
environmental organization’s coffers. And while the older oil and gas wells—
those drilled before the land was designated a bird preserve—were mostly
clustered far from the habitat of the Attwater’s prairie chickens, that was
decidedly not the case for the new well. According to Aaron Tjelmeland, the
current manager of the preserve, the spot where the conservancy allowed
drilling was relatively near the areas where the endangered birds nested, as well
as performed their distinctive mating rituals. Of all the wells, this drilling pad
was “the closest to where the prairie chickens normally hung out, or normally
boomed,” he said in an interview.6
For about three years, The Nature Conservancy’s foray into the fossil fuel
business attracted relatively little public controversy. That changed in 2002,
when a piece in the Los Angeles Times exposed the drilling. For traditional
conservationists, it was a little like finding out that Amnesty International had
opened its own prison wing at Guantánamo. “They’re exploiting the Attwater’s
prairie chicken to make money,” fumed Clait E. Braun, then president of the
Wildlife Society, and a leading expert on prairie chickens. Then, in May 2003,
The Washington Post followed up with a scathing investigation into the
organization’s questionable land deals, delving deeper into the surprising fact
that on the Texas City Prairie Preserve, one of the most respected

environmental organizations in the United States was now moonlighting as a
gas driller.7
The Nature Conservancy, sounding like pretty much everyone in the oil and
gas business, insisted that, “We can do this drilling without harming the prairie
chickens and their habitat.”8 But the track record on the preserve makes that far
from clear. In addition to the increased traffic, light, and noise that are part of
any drilling operation, there were several points when drilling and wildlife
preservation seemed to come into direct conflict.
For instance, because Attwater’s prairie chickens are so endangered, there is
a public-private program that breeds them in captivity and then releases them
into the wild, an initiative in which The Nature Conservancy was participating
on the Texas City Prairie Preserve. But at one point early on in its drilling foray,
a delay in the construction of a gas pipeline led the conservancy to postpone the
release of the captive-bred chicks by three months—a dicey call because
migrating raptors and other predators appear to have been waiting for them.9
The bird release that year was a disaster. According to an internal Nature
Conservancy report, all seventeen of the chicks “died shortly after their delayed
release.” The science director of the Texas chapter wrote that the months of
waiting had subjected the birds “to higher probability of death from raptor
predation.” According to The Washington Post report, by 2003 there were just
sixteen Attwater’s prairie chickens that The Nature Conservancy knew about
on the preserve, down from thirty-six before the drilling began. Though top
conservancy officials insisted that the birds had not been adversely affected by
its industrial activities, it was a dismal record.10
When I first came across the decade-old story, I assumed that The Nature
Conservancy’s extraction activities had stopped when they were exposed, since
the revelation had ignited a firestorm of controversy and forced the organization
to pledge not to repeat this particular fundraising technique. After the story
broke, the organization’s then president stated clearly, “We won’t initiate any
new oil, gas drilling, or mining of hard rock minerals on preserves that we own.
We’ve only done that twice in 52 years but we thought, nonetheless, we should,
for appearances’ sake, not do that again.”11
Turns out I was wrong. In fact, as of this book’s writing, the conservancy was
still extracting hydrocarbons on the Texas preserve that it rescued from Mobil
back in 1995. In a series of communications, conservancy spokespeople insisted
that the organization was required to continue fossil fuel extracting under the
terms of the original drilling lease. And it’s true that the 2003 pledge had been

carefully worded, promising not to initiate “any new” drilling activities, and
containing a proviso that it would honor “existing contracts.”12
But The Nature Conservancy has not simply continued extracting for gas in
that same well. A 2010 paper presented at a Society of Petroleum Engineers
conference, and coauthored by two conservancy officials, reveals that the
original well “died in March 2003, and was unable to flow due to excessive
water production,” leading to the drilling of a replacement well in the same area
in late 2007. It also turns out that while the original well was for gas, the new
one is now producing only oil.13
Given that close to five years elapsed between the death of the Nature
Conservancy’s first well and the drilling of the replacement, it seems possible
that the organization had the legal grounds to extricate itself from the original
lease if it had been sufficiently motivated to do so. The lease I have seen states
clearly that in the event that oil or gas production ever stops in a given “well
tract,” the operator has a 180-day window to begin “reworking” the well or to
start drilling a new one. If it fails to do so, the lease for that area is automatically
terminated. If The Nature Conservancy causes a delay in the operator’s work—
which the organization claims has regularly occurred, since it restricts drilling to
a few months per year—then the 180-day window is extended by the equivalent
amount of time. So, the organization insists that though it was “concerned”
about initial plans for the new 2007 well, due to the proposed well’s proximity
to the Attwater’s habitat, it believed it was “bound by the existing lease and
required to permit the drilling of the replacement well,” albeit in a different
location. James Petterson, director of marketing strategies at the conservancy,
told me that the organization had sought “an outside legal opinion from an oil
and gas expert” that confirmed this view. Yet in an internal explanatory
document on drilling entitled “Attwater’s Prairie Chicken Background,” the
organization emphasizes that it maintains the power to control what can and
cannot occur on the preserve. “Given the birds’ endangered status,” the
document states, “no activity can take place that is deemed likely to harm the
species.” Petterson insists that “bird experts were consulted” and “nobody [here]
would want to do anything to harm an endangered species, particularly one as
endangered as the Attwater’s Prairie Chicken . . . nobody is going to choose oil
and gas development over the last remaining handful of birds on the planet.”14
Regardless of whether the conservancy resumed drilling for oil in Texas
because it had no choice or because it wanted to get the petro dollars flowing
again after the initial controversy had died down, the issue has taken on new

urgency of late. That’s because, in November 2012, and with little fanfare, the
last of the Attwater’s prairie chickens disappeared from the Preserve. Aaron
Tjelmeland, the preserve manager, said of the birds that there are “none that we
know about.” It is worth underlining this detail: under the stewardship of what
The New Yorker describes as “the biggest environmental nongovernmental
organization in the world”—boasting over one million members and assets of
roughly $6 billion and operating in thirty-five countries—an endangered species
has been completely wiped out from one of its last remaining breeding grounds,
on which the organization earned millions drilling for and pumping oil and gas.
Amazingly, the website for the Texas City Prairie Preserve continues to boast
that the “land management techniques the conservancy utilizes at the preserve
are best practices that we export to other preserves.” And though it mentions in
passing that there are no more Attwater’s prairie chickens on the land, it says
nothing about its side business in oil and gas.15
The disappearance of the prairie chickens is no doubt the result of a
combination of factors—invasive species, low numbers of captive-bred birds,
drought (possibly linked to climate change), and the relatively small size of the
reserve (the conservancy’s preferred explanation). It’s possible that the oil and
gas drilling played no role at all.
So let’s set the birds aside for a moment. Even if a few had survived, and even
if a few return in the future, the fact remains that The Nature Conservancy has
been in the oil and gas business for a decade and half. That this could happen in
the age of climate change points to a painful reality behind the environmental
movement’s catastrophic failure to effectively battle the economic interests
behind our soaring emissions: large parts of the movement aren’t actually
fighting those interests—they have merged with them.
The Nature Conservancy, I should stress, is the only green group (that I
know of, at least) to actually sink its own oil and gas wells. But it is far from the
only group to have strong ties with the fossil fuel sector and other major
polluters. For instance, Conservation International, The Nature Conservancy,
and the Conservation Fund have all received money from Shell and BP, while
American Electric Power, a traditional dirty-coal utility, has donated to the
Conservation Fund and The Nature Conservancy. WWF (originally the World
Wildlife Fund) has had a long relationship with Shell, and the World Resources
Institute has what it describes as “a long-term, close strategic relationship with
the Shell Foundation.” Conservation International has partnerships with
Walmart, Monsanto, Australian-based mining and petroleum giant BHP

Billiton (a major extractor of coal), as well as Shell, Chevron, ExxonMobil,
Toyota, McDonald’s, and BP (according to The Washington Post BP has
channeled $2 million to Conservation International over the years).I And that
is the barest of samplings.16
The relationships are also more structural than mere donations and
partnerships. The Nature Conservancy counts BP America, Chevron, and Shell
among the members of its Business Council and Jim Rogers, chairman of the
board and former CEO of Duke Energy, one of the largest U.S. coal-burning
utilities, sits on the organization’s board of directors (past board members
include former CEOs of General Motors and American Electric Power).17
There is yet another way in which some green groups have entangled their
fates with the corporations at the heart of the climate crisis: by investing their
own money with them. For instance, while investigating The Nature
Conservancy’s foray into oil and gas drilling, I was struck by a line item in its
2012 financial statements: $22.8 million of the organization’s endowment—one
of the largest in the U.S.—was invested in “energy” companies (that figure has
since gone up to $26.5 million). Energy, of course, means oil, gas, coal, and the
like.II Curious, I soon discovered that most big conservation groups did not have
policies prohibiting them from investing their endowments in fossil fuel
companies. The hypocrisy is staggering: these organizations raise mountains of
cash every year on the promise that the funds will be spent on work that is
preserving wildlife and attempting to prevent catastrophic global warming. And
yet some have turned around and invested that money with companies that
have made it abundantly clear, through their reserves, that they intend to
extract several times more carbon than the atmosphere can absorb with any
degree of safety. It must be stated that these choices, made unilaterally by the
top tier of leadership at the big green groups, do not represent the wishes or
values of the millions of members who support them through donations or join
genuinely community supported campaigns to clean up polluted rivers, protect
beloved pieces of wilderness, or support renewables legislation. Indeed, many
have been deeply alarmed to discover that groups they believed to be
confronting polluters were in fact in business with them.18
There are, moreover, large parts of the green movement that have never
engaged in these types of arrangements—they don’t have endowments to invest
or they have clear policies prohibiting fossil fuel holdings, and some have
equally clear policies against taking donations from polluters. These groups, not
coincidentally, tend also to be the ones with track records of going head-to-head

with big oil and coal: Friends of the Earth and Greenpeace have been battling
Shell’s and Chevron’s alleged complicity with horrific human rights abuses in
the Niger Delta since the early 1990s (though Shell has agreed to pay out $15.5
million to settle a case involving these claims, it continues to deny wrongdoing,
as does Chevron); Rainforest Action Network has been at the forefront of the
international campaign against Chevron for the disaster left behind in the
Ecuadorian Amazon; Food & Water Watch has helped secure big victories
against fracking; 350.org helped launch the fossil fuel divestment movement
and has been at the forefront of the national mobilization against the Keystone
XL pipeline. The Sierra Club is a more complex case: it has also been a part of
these campaigns and is the bane of the U.S. coal industry—but between 2007
and 2010, the group secretly took millions from a natural gas company. But
under new leadership—and facing pressure from the grass roots—it has cut ties
with the fossil fuel sector.19
Even so, almost no one’s hands are clean. That’s because many of the top
foundations that underwrite much of the environmental movement—including
groups and projects with which I have been involved—come from fortunes, like
the Rockefeller family’s, that are linked with fossil fuels. And though these
foundations do fund campaigns that confront big polluters most do not prohibit
their own endowments from being invested with coal and oil. So, for example,
the Ford Foundation, which has supported the Environmental Defense Fund
and Natural Resources Defense Council (and helped support a film that is
accompanying this book), reported in 2013 that it had nearly $14 million in
Shell and BP stocks alone (another multimillion-dollar stock holding is
Norway’s Statoil).20 In North America and Europe, it’s virtually impossible to
do public interest work of any scale—in academia or journalism or activism—
without taking money of questionable origin, whether the origin is the state,
corporations, or private philanthropy. And though more accountable grassroots
movement financing models are desperately needed (and crowdfunding is a
promising start), the fact of these financial ties is not what is particularly
noteworthy, nor proof of some nefarious corruption.
Where following the financial ties between funders and public interest work
becomes relevant is when there is a compelling reason to believe that funding is
having undue influence—shaping the kinds of research undertaken, the kinds of
policies advanced, as well as the kinds of questions that get asked in the first
place. And since it is generally accepted that fossil fuel money and conservative
foundations have shaped the climate change denial movement, it seems fair to

ask whether fossil fuel money and the values of centrist foundations have shaped
parts of the movement that are in the business of proposing solutions. And there
is a good deal of evidence that these ties have indeed had a decisive influence.
The big, corporate-affiliated green groups don’t deny the reality of climate
change, of course—many work hard to raise the alarm. And yet several of these
groups have consistently, and aggressively, pushed responses to climate change
that are the least burdensome, and often directly beneficial, to the largest
greenhouse gas emitters on the planet—even when the policies come at the
direct expense of communities fighting to keep fossil fuels in the ground. Rather
than advancing policies that treat greenhouse gases as dangerous pollutants
demanding clear, enforceable regulations that would restrict emissions and
create the conditions for a full transition to renewables, these groups have
pushed convoluted market-based schemes that have treated greenhouse gases as
late-capitalist abstractions to be traded, bundled, speculated upon, and moved
around the globe like currency or subprime debt.
And many of these same groups have championed one of the main fossil fuels
—natural gas—as a supposed solution to climate change, despite mounting
evidence that in the coming decades, the methane it releases, particularly
through the fracking process, has the potential to help lock us into catastrophic
levels of warming (as explained in chapter four). In some cases, large
foundations have collaborated to explicitly direct the U.S. green movement
toward these policies. Most infamously within the movement, a 2007 road map
titled “Design to Win: Philanthropy’s Role in the Fight Against Global
Warming”—which was sponsored by six large foundations—advocated carbon
trading as a response to climate change and supported both natural gas and
expanded nuclear power. And as these policies were being turned into political
campaigns, the message sent to green groups was essentially “step in line, or else
you’re not going to get your share of the money,” recalls Jigar Shah, a renowned
solar entrepreneur, former Greenpeace USA board member, and one-time
director of the industry-focused Carbon War Room.21
The “market-based” climate solutions favored by so many large foundations
and adopted by many greens have provided an invaluable service to the fossil
fuel sector as a whole. For one, they succeeded in taking what began as a
straightforward debate about shifting away from fossil fuels and put it through a
jargon generator so convoluted that the entire climate issue came to seem too
complex and arcane for nonexperts to understand, seriously undercutting the
potential to build a mass movement capable of taking on powerful polluters. As

Drexel University sociologist Robert Brulle has observed, “The movement to
technical and market-based analyses as the core of reform environmentalism
gutted whatever progressive vision” the movement had previously held. “Rather
than engaging the broader public, reform environmentalism focuses debate
among experts in the scientific, legal, and economic communities. It may
provide technical solutions to specific problems but it neglects the larger social
dynamics that underlie environmental degradation.”22
These policies have also fed the false perception that a full transition to
renewable energy is technically impossible—since if it were possible, why would
all these well-meaning green groups be spending so much of their time pushing
trading schemes and singing the praises of natural gas, even when extracted
through the ecologically destructive method of fracking?
Often these compromises are rationalized according to the theory of “lowhanging fruit.” This strategy holds, in essence, that it’s hard and expensive to try
to convince politicians to regulate and discipline the most powerful
corporations in the world. So rather than pick that very tough fight, it’s wiser
and more effective to begin with something easier. Asking consumers to buy a
more expensive, less toxic laundry detergent, for instance. Making cars more
fuel-efficient. Switching to a supposedly cleaner fossil fuel. Paying an Indigenous
tribe to stop logging a forest in Papua New Guinea to offset the emissions of a
coal plant that gets to stay open in Ohio.
With emissions up by about 57 percent since the U.N. climate convention
was signed in 1992, the failure of this polite strategy is beyond debate. And yet
still, at the upper echelons of the climate movement, our soaring emissions are
never blamed on anything as concrete as the fossil fuel corporations that work
furiously to block all serious attempts to regulate emissions, and certainly not on
the economic model that demands that these companies put profit before the
health of the natural systems upon which all life depends. Rather the villains are
always vague and unthreatening—a lack of “political will,” a deficit of
“ambition”—while fossil fuel executives are welcomed at U.N. climate summits
as key “partners” in the quest for “climate solutions.”23
This upside-down world reached new levels of absurdity in November 2013
at the annual U.N. climate summit held in Warsaw, Poland. The gathering was
sponsored by a panoply of fossil fuel companies, including a major miner of
lignite coal, while the Polish government hosted a parallel “Coal & Climate
Summit,” which held up the dirtiest of all the fossil fuels as part of the battle
against global warming. The official U.N. climate negotiation process gave its

tacit endorsement of the coal event when its highest official—Christiana
Figueres, executive secretary of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change—agreed to deliver a keynote address to the gathering, defying
calls from activists to boycott. “The summit’s focus on continued reliance on
coal is directly counter to the goal of these climate negotiations,” said Alden
Meyer of the Union of Concerned Scientists, “which is to dramatically reduce
emissions of heat-trapping gases in order to avoid the worst impacts of climate
change.”24
A great many progressives have opted out of the climate change debate in
part because they thought that the Big Green groups, flush with philanthropic
dollars, had this issue covered. That, it turns out, was a grave mistake. To
understand why, it’s necessary to return, once again, to the epic case of bad
historical timing that has plagued this crisis since the late eighties.

The Golden Age of Environmental Law
I. F. Stone may have thought that environmentalism was distracting the youth
of the 1960s and early 1970s from more urgent battles, but by today’s standards,
the environmentalists of that era look like fire-breathing radicals. Galvanized by
the 1962 publication of Silent Spring and the 1969 Santa Barbara oil spill (the
Deepwater Horizon disaster of its day), they launched a new kind of North
American environmentalism, one far more confrontational than the
gentlemen’s conservationism of the past.
In addition to the newly formed Friends of the Earth (created in 1969) and
Greenpeace (launched in 1971), the movement also included groups like the
Environmental Defense Fund, then an idealistic gang of scrappy scientists and
lawyers determined to heed Rachel Carson’s warnings. The group’s unofficial
slogan was, “Sue the bastards,” and so they did. The EDF fought for and filed the
original lawsuit that led to the U.S. ban on DDT as an insecticide, resulting in
the revival of many species of birds, including the bald eagle.25
This was a time when intervening directly in the market to prevent harm was
still regarded as a sensible policy option. Confronted with unassailable evidence
of a grave collective problem, politicians across the political spectrum still asked
themselves: “What can we do to stop it?” (Not: “How can we develop complex
financial mechanisms to help the market fix it for us?”)

What followed was a wave of environmental victories unimaginable by
today’s antigovernment standards. In the United States, the legislative legacy is
particularly striking: the Clean Air Act (1963), the Wilderness Act (1964), the
Water Quality Act (1965), the Air Quality Act (1967), the Wild and Scenic
Rivers Act (1968), the National Environmental Policy Act (1970), the revised
Clean Air Act (1970), the Occupational Safety and Health Act (1970), the
Clean Water Act (1972), the Marine Mammal Protection Act (1972), the
Endangered Species Act (1973), the Safe Drinking Water Act (1974), the
Toxic Substances Control Act (1976), the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (1976). In all, twenty-three federal environmental acts became
law over the course of the 1970s alone, culminating in the Superfund Act in
1980, which required industry, through a small levy, to pay the cost of cleaning
up areas that had become toxic.
These victories spilled over into Canada, which was also experiencing a
flurry of environmental activism. The federal government passed its own Water
Act (1970) and Clean Air Act (1971), and gave teeth to the nineteenthcentury Fisheries Act a few years later, turning it into a powerful force for
combating marine pollution and protecting habitats. Meanwhile, the European
Community declared environmental protection a top priority as early as 1972,
laying the groundwork for its leadership in environmental law in the decades to
follow. And in the wake of the U.N. Conference on the Human Environment
in Stockholm that same year, the 1970s became a foundational decade for
international environmental law, producing such landmarks as the Convention
on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter
(1972), the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Fauna and Flora (1973), and the Convention on Long-Range Transboundary
Air Pollution (1979).
Although robust environmental law would not begin to take hold in much of
the developing world for another decade or so, direct environmental defense
also intensified in the 1970s among peasant, fishing, and Indigenous
communities across the Global South —the origins of what economist Joan
Martínez Alier and others have described as the “environmentalism of the
poor.” This stretched from creative, women-led campaigns against deforestation
in India and Kenya, to widespread resistance to nuclear power plants, dams, and
other forms of industrial development in Brazil, Colombia, and Mexico.26
Simple principles governed this golden age of environmental legislation: ban
or severely limit the offending activity or substance and where possible, get the

polluter to pay for the cleanup. As journalist Mark Dowie outlines in his history
of the U.S. environmental movement, Losing Ground, the real-world results of
this approach were concrete and measurable. “Tens of millions of acres have
been added to the federal wilderness system, environmental impact assessments
are now required for all major developments, some lakes that were declared dead
are living again. . . . Lead particulates have been impressively reduced in the
atmosphere; DDT is no longer found in American body fat, which also contains
considerably fewer polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) than it once did. Mercury
has virtually disappeared from Great Lakes sediment; and Strontium 90 is no
longer found in either cows’ milk or mothers’ milk.” And Dowie stressed: “What
all these facts have in common is that they are the result of outright bans
against the use or production of the substances in question.”III27
These are the tough tools with which the environmental movement won its
greatest string of victories. But with that success came some rather significant
changes. For a great many groups, the work of environmentalism stopped being
about organizing protests and teach-ins and became about drafting laws, then
suing corporations for violating them, as well as challenging governments for
failing to enforce them. In rapid fashion, what had been a rabble of hippies
became a movement of lawyers, lobbyists, and U.N. summit hoppers. As a
result, many of these newly professional environmentalists came to pride
themselves on being the ultimate insiders, able to wheel and deal across the
political spectrum. And so long as the victories kept coming, their insider
strategy seemed to be working.
Then came the 1980s. “A tree is a tree,” Ronald Reagan famously said in the
midst of a pitched battle over logging rights. “How many more do you need to
look at?” With Reagan’s arrival in the White House, and the ascendency of
many think-tank ideologues to powerful positions in his administration, the
goalposts were yanked to the right. Reagan filled his inner circle with proindustry scientists who denied the reality of every environmental ill from acid
rain to climate change. And seemingly overnight, banning and tightly
regulating harmful industrial practices went from being bipartisan political
practice to a symptom of “command and control environmentalism.” Using
messaging that would have fit right in at a Heartland conference three decades
later, James Watt, Reagan’s much despised interior secretary, accused greens of
using environmental fears “as a tool to achieve a greater objective,” which he
claimed was “centralized planning and control of the society.” Watt also warned
darkly about where that could lead: “Look what happened to Germany in the

1930s. The dignity of man was subordinated to the powers of Nazism. The
dignity of man was subordinated in Russia. Those are the forces that this thing
can evolve into.”28
For the Big Green groups, all this came as a rude surprise. Suddenly they were
on the outside looking in, being red-baited by the kinds of people with whom
they used to have drinks. Worse, the movement’s core beliefs about the need to
respond to environmental threats by firmly regulating corporations were being
casually cast into the dustbin of history. What was an insider environmentalist
to do?

Extreme 1980s Makeover
There were options, as there always are. The greens could have joined coalitions
of unions, civil rights groups, and pensioners who were also facing attacks on
hard-won gains, forming a united front against the public sector cutbacks and
deregulation that was hurting them all. And they could have kept aggressively
using the courts to sue the bastards. There was, throughout the 1980s, mounting
public concern even among Republicans about Reagan’s environmental
rollbacks (which is how Planet Earth ended up on the cover of Time in early
1989).IV29
And some did take up that fight. As Reagan launched a series of attacks on
environmental regulations, there was resistance, especially at the local level,
where African American communities in particular were facing an aggressive
new wave of toxic dumping. These urgent, health-based struggles eventually
coalesced into the environmental justice movement, which held the First
National People of Color Environmental Leadership Summit in October 1991, a
historic gathering that adopted a set of principles that remains a movement
touchstone to this day.30 At the national and international levels, groups like
Greenpeace continued to engage in direct action throughout the 1980s, though
much of their energy was understandably focused on the perils of both nuclear
energy and weapons.
But many green groups chose a very different strategy. In the 1980s, extreme
free market ideology became the discourse of power, the language that elites
were speaking to one another, even if large parts of the general public remained
un-persuaded. That meant that for the mainstream green movement,
confronting the antigovernment logic of market triumphalism head-on would

have meant exiling themselves to the margins. And many of the big-budget
green groups—having grown comfortable with their access to power and
generous support from large, elite foundations—were unwilling to do that. Gus
Speth, who cofounded the Natural Resources Defense Council and served as a
top environmental advisor to Jimmy Carter during his presidency, described the
problem like this: “We didn’t adjust with Reagan. We kept working within a
system but we should have tried to change the system and root causes.”31 (After
years in high-level jobs inside the U.N. system and as a dean of Yale’s School of
Forestry and Environmental Studies, Speth has today thrown his lot in with the
radicals, getting arrested to protest the Keystone XL pipeline and cofounding an
organization questioning the logic of economic growth.)
Part of what increased the pressure for ideological conformity in the 1980s
was the arrival of several new groups on the environmental scene, competing for
limited philanthropic dollars. These groups pitched themselves as modern
environmentalists for the Reagan era: pro-business, nonconfrontational, and
ready to help polish even the most tarnished corporate logos. “Our approach is
one of collaboration, rather than confrontation. We are creative,
entrepreneurial, and partnership-driven. We don’t litigate,” explains the
Conservation Fund, founded in 1985. Two years later came Conservation
International, which claims to have “singlehandedly redefined conservation”
thanks largely to a philosophy of working “with companies large and small to
make conservation part of their business model.”32
This open-for-business approach was so adept at attracting big donors and
elite access that many older, more established green groups raced to get with the
agreeable program, taking an “if you can’t beat ’em, join ’em” attitude to brazen
extremes. It was in this period that the Nature Conservancy started loosening its
definition of “preservation” so that conservation lands would eventually
accommodate such dissonant activities as mansion building and oil drilling
(laying the foundation for the group to get in on the drilling action itself). “I
used to say that the only things not allowed on Nature Conservancy reserves
were mining and slavery, and I wasn’t sure about the latter,” said Kierán
Suckling of the Center for Biological Diversity. “Now I may have to withdraw
the former as well.”33
Indeed the pro-corporate conversion of large parts of the green movement in
the 1980s led to deep schisms inside the environmental movement. Some
activists grew so disillusioned with the willingness of the big groups to partner
with polluters that they broke away from the mainstream movement completely.

Some formed more militant, confrontation-oriented groups like Earth First!,
whose members attempted to stop loggers with sabotage and direct action.
The debates, for the most part, took place behind the scenes but on April 23,
1990, they spilled into the headlines. It was the day after Earth Day—at that
time an annual ritual of mass corporate greenwashing—and around one
thousand demonstrators stormed the New York and the Pacific Stock Exchanges
to draw attention to the “institutions responsible for much of the ecological
devastation which is destroying the planet.” Members of grassroots groups like
the Love Canal Homeowners Association, the Bhopal Action Resource Group,
and the National Toxics Campaign handed out pamphlets that read in part,
“Who is destroying the earth—are we all equally to blame? No! We say go to
the source. We say take it to Wall Street!” The pamphlets went on: “The
polluters would have us believe that we are all just common travelers on
Spaceship Earth, when in fact a few of them are at the controls, and the rest of
us are choking on their exhaust.”34
This confrontational rhetoric—a foreshadowing of Occupy Wall Street two
decades later, as well as the fossil fuel divestment movement—was an explicit
critique of the corporate infiltration of the green movement. Daniel Finkenthal,
a spokesperson for the anticorporate protests, declared, “Real environmental
groups are disgusted with the corporate buyout of Earth Day,” telling one
journalist that sponsors are “spending more money on Earth Day promotion
than they are on actual corporate reform and the environment.”35

Climate Policy and the Price of Surrender
Of all the big green groups that underwent pro-business makeovers in the 1980s,
none attracted more acrimony or disappointment than the Environmental
Defense Fund, the once combative organization that had spent its early years
translating Rachel Carson’s ideas into action. In the mid-1980s, a young lawyer
named Fred Krupp took the reins of the organization and he was convinced that
the group’s “sue the bastards” motto was so out of step with the times that it
belonged at a garage sale next to dog-eared copies of The Limits to Growth.
Under Krupp’s leadership, which continues to this day, the EDF’s new goal
became: “creating markets for the bastards,” as his colleague Eric Pooley would
later characterize it.36 And it was this transformation, more than any other, that
produced a mainstream climate movement that ultimately found it entirely

appropriate to have coal and oil companies sponsor their most important
summits, while investing their own wealth with these same players.
The new era was officially inaugurated on November 20, 1986, when Krupp
published a cocky op-ed in The Wall Street Journal. In it he announced that a
new generation of pro-business environmentalists had arrived and with it “a new
strategy in the movement.” Krupp explained that his generation rejected the
old-fashioned idea that “either the industrial economy wins or the environment
wins, with one side’s gain being the other’s loss. The new environmentalism
does not accept ‘either-or’ as inevitable and has shown that in many critical
instances it is a fallacy.” Rather than attempting to ban harmful activities, as
Krupp’s own organization had helped to do with DDT, the EDF would now form
partnerships with polluters—or “coalitions of former enemies”—and persuade
them that there are cost savings as well as new markets in going green. In time,
Walmart, McDonald’s, FedEx, and AT&T would all enjoy high-profile
partnerships with this storied environmental pioneer.37
The group prided itself on putting “results” above ideology, but in truth
Krupp’s EDF was highly ideological—it’s just that its ideology was the procorporate groupthink of the day, one that holds that private, market-based
solutions are inherently superior to simple regulatory ones. A turning point
came in 1988 when George H. W. Bush came to power promising action on
acid rain. The old way of addressing the problem would have been
straightforward: since sulfur dioxide emissions were the primary cause of acid
rain, the solution would have been to require their reduction by a fixed amount
across the board. Instead, the EDF pushed for the first full-fledged cap-and-trade
system. These rules did not tell polluters that they had to cut their sulfur
emissions but, instead, set a nationwide cap on sulfur dioxide, beneath which
big emitters like coal-fired power plants could do as they pleased—pay other
companies to make reductions for them, purchase allowances permitting them
to pollute as much as they had before, or make a profit by selling whatever
permits they didn’t use.38
The new approach worked and it was popular among foundations and private
donors, particularly on Wall Street, where financiers were understandably
attracted to the idea of harnessing the profit motive to solve environmental ills.
Under Krupp’s leadership, the EDF’s annual budget expanded from $3 million to
roughly $120 million. Julian Robertson, founder of the hedge fund Tiger
Management, underwrote the EDF’s work to the tune of $40 million, a
staggering sum for a single benefactor.V39

The Environmental Defense Fund has always insisted that it does not take
donations from the companies with which it forms partnerships—that, writes
EDF senior vice president for strategy and communications Eric Pooley, “would
undermine our independence and integrity.” But the policy doesn’t bear much
scrutiny. For instance, one of the EDF’s flagship partnerships is with Walmart,
with whom it collaborates to “make the company more sustainable.” And it’s
true that Walmart doesn’t donate to the EDF directly. However, the Walton
Family Foundation, which is entirely controlled by members of the family that
founded Walmart, gave the EDF $65 million between 2009 and 2013. In 2011,
the foundation provided the group with nearly 15 percent of its funding.
Meanwhile, Sam Rawlings Walton, grandson of Walmart founder Sam Walton,
sits on the EDF’s board of trustees (identified merely as “Boatman,
Philanthropist, Entrepreneur” on the organization’s website).40
The EDF claims that it “holds Walmart to the same standards we would any
other company.” Which, judging by Walmart’s rather dismal environmental
record since this partnership began—from its central role in fueling urban
sprawl to its steadily increasing emissions—is not a very high standard at all.41
Nor is the Environmental Defense Fund the only environmental organization
to have benefited from the Walton family’s largesse. Their foundation is one of
the top green funders, handing out more than $71 million in grants for
environmental causes in 2011, with about half of the money going to the EDF,
Conservation International, and the Marine Stewardship Council. All have
partnerships with Walmart, whether to lower emissions, stamp an eco label on
some of the seafood the company sells, or to co-launch a line of “mine to
market” jewelry. Stacy Mitchell, a researcher with the Institute for Local SelfReliance, observes that having large parts of the green movement so dependent
on the scions of a company that almost singlehandedly supersized the retail
sector and exported the model around the world has had profound political
implications. “Walmart’s money is exerting significant influence in setting the
agenda, defining the problems, and elevating certain kinds of approaches—
notably those that reinforce, rather than challenge, the power of large
corporations in our economy and society,” she writes.42
And this is the heart of the issue—not simply that a group that gets a large
portion of its budget from the Walton family fortune is unlikely to be highly
critical of Walmart. The 1990s was the key decade when the contours of the
climate battle were being drawn—when a collective strategy for rising to the
challenge was developed and when the first wave of supposed solutions was

presented to the public. It was also the period when Big Green became most
enthusiastically pro-corporate, most committed to a low-friction model of social
change in which everything had to be “win-win.” And in the same period many
of the corporate partners of groups like the EDF and the Nature Conservancy—
Walmart, FedEx, GM—were pushing hard for the global deregulatory
framework that has done so much to send emissions soaring.
This alignment of economic interests—combined with the ever powerful
desire to be seen as “serious” in circles where seriousness is equated with toeing
the pro-market line—fundamentally shaped how these green groups conceived
of the climate challenge from the start. Global warming was not defined as a
crisis being fueled by overconsumption, or by high emissions industrial
agriculture, or by car culture, or by a trade system that insists that vast
geographical distances do not matter—root causes that would have demanded
changes in how we live, work, eat, and shop. Instead, climate change was
presented as a narrow technical problem with no end of profitable solutions
within the market system, many of which were available for sale at Walmart.VI
The effect of this “bounding of the debate,” as the Scottish author and
environmentalist Alastair McIntosh describes it, reaches far beyond a few U.S.
groups. “In my experience,” writes McIntosh, “most international climate
change agency personnel take the view that ‘we just can’t go there’ in terms of
the politics of cutting consumerism.” This is usually framed as an optimistic
faith in markets, but in fact it “actually conceals pessimism because it keeps us
in the displacement activity of barking up the wrong tree. It is an evasion of
reality, and with it, the need to fundamentally appraise the human condition in
order to seek the roots of hope.”43 Put another way, the refusal of so many
environmentalists to consider responses to the climate crisis that would upend
the economic status quo forces them to place their hopes in solutions—whether
miracle products, or carbon markets, or “bridge fuels”—that are either so weak
or so high-risk that entrusting them with our collective safety constitutes what
can only be described as magical thinking.
I do not question the desire on the part of these self-styled pragmatists to
protect the earth from catastrophic warming. But between the Heartlanders who
recognize that climate change is a profound threat to our economic and social
systems and therefore deny its scientific reality, and those who claim climate
change requires only minor tweaks to business-as-usual and therefore allow
themselves to believe in its reality, it’s not clear who is more deluded.

Shopping Our Way Out of It
For a few years around the 2006 release of Al Gore’s An Inconvenient Truth, it
seemed as if climate change was finally going to inspire the transformative
movement of our era. Public belief in the problem was high, and the issue
seemed to be everywhere. Yet on looking back on that period, what is strange is
that all the energy seemed to be coming from the very top tier of society. In the
first decade of the new millennium, climate talk was a strikingly elite affair, the
stuff of Davos panels and gee-whiz TED Talks, of special green issues of Vanity
Fair and celebrities arriving at the Academy Awards in hybrid cars. And yet
behind the spectacle, there was virtually no discernible movement, at least not
of the sort that anyone involved in the civil rights, antiwar, or women’s
movements would recognize. There were few mass marches, almost no direct
action beyond the occasional media-friendly stunt, and no angry leaders (other
than a former vice president of the United States).
In a sense, the period represented a full-circle return to the gentlemen’s
clubhouse in which the conservation movement began, with Sierra Club
cofounder John Muir persuading President Theodore Roosevelt to save large
parts of Yosemite while the two men talked around the bonfire on a camping
trip. And though the head of Conservation International did not go camping on
the melting glaciers with George W. Bush in order to impress upon him the
reality of climate change, there were plenty of postmodern equivalents,
including celebrity-studded eco-cruises that allowed Fortune 500 CEOs to get a
closer look at endangered coral reefs.
It wasn’t that there was no role for the public. We were called upon
periodically to write letters, sign petitions, turn off our lights for an hour, make a
giant human hourglass that could be photographed from the sky. And of course
we were always asked to send money to the Big Green groups that were
supposedly just on the cusp of negotiating a solution to climate change on our
behalf. But most of all, regular, noncelebrity people were called upon to exercise
their consumer power—not by shopping less but by discovering new and
exciting ways to consume more.VII And if guilt set in, well, we could click on
the handy carbon calculators on any one of dozens of green sites and purchase
an offset, and our sins would instantly be erased.44
In addition to not doing much to actually lower emissions, these various
approaches also served to reinforce the very “extrinsic” values that we now
know are the greatest psychological barriers to climate action—from the

worship of wealth and fame for their own sakes to the idea that change is
something that is handed down from above by our betters, rather than
something we demand for ourselves. They may even have played a role in
weakening public belief in the reality of human-caused climate change. Indeed a
growing number of communications specialists now argue that because the
“solutions” to climate change proposed by many green groups in this period were
so borderline frivolous, many people concluded that the groups must have been
exaggerating the scale of the problem. After all, if climate change really was as
dire as Al Gore argued it was in An Inconvenient Truth, wouldn’t the
environmental movement be asking the public to do more than switch brands of
cleaning liquid, occasionally walk to work, and send money? Wouldn’t they be
trying to shut down the fossil fuel companies?
“Imagine that someone came up with a brilliant new campaign against
smoking. It would show graphic images of people dying of lung cancer followed
by the punch line: ‘It’s easy to be healthy—smoke one less cigarette a month.’
We know without a moment’s reflection that this campaign would fail,” wrote
British climate activist and author George Marshall. “The target is so ludicrous,
and the disconnection between the images and the message is so great, that
most smokers would just laugh it off.”45
It would be one thing if, while individuals were being asked to voluntarily
“green” the minutiae of their lives, the Big Green NGOs had simultaneously
gone after the big polluters, demanding that they match our individual small
cuts in carbon emissions with large-scale, industry-wide reductions. And some
did. But many of the most influential green groups did precisely the opposite.
Not only did they help develop complex financial mechanisms to allow these
corporations to keep emitting, they also actively campaigned to expand the
market for one of the three main fossil fuels.

Fracking and the Burning Bridge
The gas industry itself came up with the pitch that it could be a “bridge” to a
clean energy future back in the early 1980s. Then in 1988, with climate change
awareness breaking into the mainstream, the American Gas Association began
to explicitly frame its product as a response to the “greenhouse effect.”46
In 1992, a coalition of progressive groups—including the Natural Resources
Defense Council, Friends of the Earth, Environmental Action, and Public

Citizen—officially embraced the idea, presenting a “Sustainable Energy
Blueprint” to the incoming administration of Bill Clinton that included a
significant role for natural gas. The NRDC was a particularly strong advocate,
going on to call natural gas “the bridge to greater reliance on cleaner and
renewable forms of energy.”47
And at the time, it seemed to make a good deal of sense: renewable
technology was less mature than it is now, and the gas in question was being
extracted through conventional drilling methods. Today, the landscape has
shifted dramatically on both counts. Renewable technologies have become
radically more efficient and affordable, making a full transition to the power
they provide both technologically and economically possible within the next
few decades. The other key change is that the vast majority of new gas projects
in North America rely on hydraulic fracturing—not conventional drilling—and
fracking-based exploration and production are on the rise around the world.48
These developments have significantly weakened the climate case for natural
gas—especially fracked natural gas. We now know that fracked natural gas may
leak enough methane to make its warming impact, especially in the near term,
comparable to that of coal. Anthony Ingraffea, who coauthored the
breakthrough Cornell study on methane leakage and describes himself as “a
longtime oil and gas engineer who helped develop shale fracking techniques for
the Energy Department,” wrote in The New York Times, “The gas extracted from
shale deposits is not a ‘bridge’ to a renewable energy future—it’s a gangplank to
more warming and away from clean energy investments.”49
We also know, from experience in the U.S., that cheap and abundant natural
gas doesn’t replace only coal but also potential power from renewables. This has
led the Tyndall Centre’s Kevin Anderson to conclude, “If we are serious about
avoiding dangerous climate change, the only safe place for shale gas remains in
the ground.” Biologist Sandra Steingraber of New Yorkers Against Fracking puts
the stark choice like this: we are “standing at an energy crossroads. One signpost
points to a future powered by digging fossils from the ground and lighting them
on fire. The other points to renewable energy. You cannot go in both directions
at once. Subsidizing the infrastructure for one creates disincentives for the
other.”50
Even more critically, many experts are convinced that we do not need
unconventional fuels like fracked gas to make a full transition to renewables.
Mark Z. Jacobson, the Stanford engineering professor who coauthored the road
map for reaching 100 percent renewable energy by 2030, says that conventional

fossil fuels can power the transition and keep the lights on in the meantime.
“We don’t need unconventional fuels to produce the infrastructure to convert to
entirely clean and renewable wind, water, and solar power for all purposes. We
can rely on the existing infrastructure plus the new infrastructure [of renewable
generation] to provide the energy for producing the rest of the clean
infrastructure that we’ll need,” he said in an interview, adding, “Conventional
oil and gas is much more than enough.”51
How have the Big Green groups responded to this new information? Some,
like the NRDC, have cooled off from their earlier support, acknowledging the
risks and pushing for tougher regulations while still advocating natural gas as a
replacement for coal and other dirty fuels. But others have chosen to dig in even
deeper. The Environmental Defense Fund and the Nature Conservancy, for
example, have responded to revelations about the huge risks associated with
natural gas by undertaking a series of initiatives that give the distinct impression
that fracking is on the cusp of becoming clean and safe. And as usual, much of
the funding for this work has strong links to the fossil fuel sector.
The Nature Conservancy, for its part, has received hundreds of thousands of
dollars from JP Morgan to come up with voluntary rules for fracking. JP Morgan,
unsurprisingly, is a leading financier of the industry, with at least a hundred
major clients who frack, according to the bank’s top environmental executive,
Matthew Arnold. (“We are number one or number two in any given year in the
oil and gas industry worldwide,” Arnold told The Guardian in February 2013.)
The conservancy also has a high-profile partnership with BP in Wyoming’s
Jonah Field, a huge fracking-for-gas operation in an area rich with vulnerable
wildlife. The Nature Conservancy’s job has been to identify habitat preservation
and conservation projects to “offset the impacts of oil and gas drilling pads and
infrastructure.” From a climate change perspective, this is an absurd proposition,
since these projects have no hope of offsetting the most damaging impact of all:
the release of heat-trapping gases into the atmosphere. Which is why the most
important preservation work that any environmental group can do is preserving
the carbon in the ground, wherever it is. (Then again, this is The Nature
Conservancy, which has its very own gas well in the middle of a nature preserve
in Texas).52
Similarly, the EDF has teamed up with several large energy companies to
open the Center for Sustainable Shale Development (CSSD)—and as many
have pointed out, the very name of the center makes it clear that it will not be
questioning whether “sustainable” extraction of fossil fuels from shale is possible

in the age of climate change. The center has advanced a set of voluntary
industry standards that its members claim will gradually make fracking safer. But
as then–Demos senior policy analyst J. Mijin Cha pointed out, “The Center’s
new standards . . . are not enforceable. If anything, they provide cover for oil
and gas interests that want to derail the transition to a clean economy powered
by renewable energy.”53
One of the center’s key funders is the Heinz Endowments, which as it turns
out, was no disinterested party. A June 2013 investigation by the Public
Accountability Initiative reported that, “The Heinz Endowments, has
significant, undisclosed ties to the natural gas industry. . . . Heinz Endowments
president Robert F. Vagt is currently a director at Kinder Morgan, a natural gas
pipeline company, and owns more than $1.2 million in company stock. This is
not disclosed on the Heinz Endowments website or the website of CSSD, where
Vagt serves as a director. Kinder Morgan has cited increased regulation of
fracking as a key business risk in recent corporate filings.” (After the controversy
broke, Heinz Endowments appeared to move away from some of its earlier progas positions and went through a significant staffing shakeup, including the
resignation of Vagt as foundation president in early 2014.)54
The EDF has also received a $6 million grant from the foundation of New
York’s billionaire ex-mayor Michael Bloomberg (who is strongly pro-fracking),
specifically to develop and secure regulations intended to make fracking safe—
once again, not to impartially assess whether such an outcome is even possible.
And Bloomerg is no impartial observer in all this. The former mayor’s personal
and philanthropic fortune—worth over $30 billion—is managed by investment
firm Willett Advisors, which was established by Bloomberg and his associates.
According to Bloomberg Businessweek, and confirmed by Bloomberg
Philanthropies (which shares a building with the firm), Willett “invests in real
assets focusing on oil and natural gas areas.” Michael Bloomberg did not respond
to repeated requests for comment.55
The EDF has done more than help the fracking industry appear to be taking
environmental concerns seriously. It also led research that has been used to
counter claims that high methane leakage disqualifies fracked natural gas as a
climate solution. The EDF has partnered with Shell, Chevron, and other top
energy companies on one in a series of studies on methane leaks with the clear
goal, as one EDF official put it, of helping “natural gas to be an accepted part of
a strategy for improving energy security and moving to a clean energy future.”
When the first study arrived in September 2013, published in Proceedings of the

National Academy of Sciences, it made news by identifying fugitive methane
leakage rates from gas extraction that were ten to twenty times lower than those
in most other studies to date.56
But the study’s design contained serious limitations, the most glaring of
which was allowing the gas companies to choose the wells they wanted
inspected. Robert Howarth, the lead author of the breakthrough 2011 Cornell
study on the same subject, pointed out that the EDF’s findings were “based only
on evaluation of sites and times chosen by industry,” and that the paper “must
be viewed as a best-case scenario,” rather than a reflection of how the industry
functions as a whole. He added, “The gas industry can produce gas with
relatively low emissions, but they very often do not do so. They do better when
they know they are being carefully watched.” These concerns, however, were
entirely upstaged by the priceless headlines inspired by the Environmental
Defense Fund study: “Study: Leaks at Natural Gas Wells Less Than Previously
Thought” (Time); “Study: Methane Leaks from Gas Drilling Not Huge”
(Associated Press); “Fracking Methane Fears Overdone” (The Australian); and
so on.57
The result of all this has been a great deal of public uncertainty. Is fracking
safe after all? Is it about to become safe? Is it clean or dirty? Like the wellunderstood strategy of sowing doubts about the science of climate change, this
confusion effectively undermines the momentum away from fossil fuels and
toward renewable energy. As Josh Fox, the director of the Academy Award–
nominated documentary on fracking, Gasland, puts it: “I think that what’s
happening here is a squandering of the greatest political will that we’ve ever had
towards getting off of fossil fuels.”58
Because while green groups battle over the research and voluntary codes, the
gas companies are continuing to drill, leak, and pour billions of dollars into new
infrastructure designed to last for many decades.

Trading in Pollution
When governments began negotiating the international climate treaty that
would become the Kyoto Protocol, there was broad consensus about what the
agreement needed to accomplish. The wealthy, industrialized countries
responsible for the lion’s share of historical emissions would have to lead by
capping their emissions at a fixed level and then systematically reducing them.

The European Union and developing countries assumed that governments
would do this by putting in place strong domestic measures to reduce emissions
at home, for example by taxing carbon, and beginning a shift to renewable
energy.
But when the Clinton administration came to the negotiations, it proposed
an alternate route: create a system of international carbon trading modeled on
the cap-and-trade system used to address acid rain (in the run-up to Kyoto, the
EDF worked closely on the plan with Al Gore’s office).59 Rather than
straightforwardly requiring all industrialized countries to lower their greenhouse
gas emissions by a fixed amount, the scheme would issue pollution permits,
which they could use, sell if they didn’t need them, or purchase so that they
could pollute more. National programs would be set up so that companies could
similarly trade these permits, with the country staying within an overall
emissions cap. Meanwhile, projects that were employing practices that claimed
to be keeping carbon out of the atmosphere—whether by planting trees that
sequester carbon, or by producing low carbon energy, or by upgrading a dirty
factory to lower its emissions—could qualify for carbon credits. These credits
could be purchased by polluters and used to offset their own emissions.
The U.S. government was so enthusiastic about this approach that it made
the inclusion of carbon trading a deal breaker in the Kyoto negotiations. This
led to what France’s former environment minister Dominique Voynet described
as “radically antagonistic” conflicts between the United States and Europe,
which saw the creation of a global carbon market as tantamount to abandoning
the climate crisis to “the law of the jungle.” Angela Merkel, then Germany’s
environment minister, insisted, “The aim cannot be for industrialized countries
to satisfy their obligations solely through emissions trading and profit.”60
It is one of the great ironies of environmental history that the United States
—after winning this pitched battle at the negotiating table—would fail to ratify
the Kyoto Protocol, and that the most important emissions market would
become a reality in Europe, where it was opposed from the outset. The European
Union’s Emissions Trading System (ETS) was launched in 2005 and would go
on to become closely integrated with the United Nations’ Clean Development
Mechanism (CDM), which was written into the Kyoto Protocol. At least
initially, the markets seemed to take off. From 2005 through 2010, the World
Bank estimates that the various carbon markets around the globe saw over $500
billion in trades (though some experts believe those estimates are inflated).
Huge numbers of projects around the world, meanwhile, are generating carbon

credits—the CDM alone had an estimated seven-thousand-plus registered
projects in early 2014.61
But it didn’t take long for the flaws in the plan to show. Under the U.N.
system, all kinds of dodgy industrial projects can generate lucrative credits. For
instance, oil companies operating in the Niger Delta that practice “flaring”—
setting fire to the natural gas released in the oil drilling process because
capturing and using the potent greenhouse gas is more expensive than burning
it—have argued that they should be paid if they stop engaging in this
enormously destructive practice. And indeed some are already registered to
receive carbon credits under the U.N. system for no longer flaring—despite the
fact that gas flaring has been illegal in Nigeria since 1984 (it’s a law filled with
holes and is largely ignored).62 Even a highly polluting factory that installs a
piece of equipment that keeps a greenhouse gas out of the atmosphere can
qualify as “green development” under U.N. rules. And this, in turn, is used to
justify more dirty emissions somewhere else.
The most embarrassing controversy for defenders of this model involves
coolant factories in India and China that emit the highly potent greenhouse gas
HFC-23 as a by-product. By installing relatively inexpensive equipment to
destroy the gas (with a plasma torch, for example) rather than venting it into
the air, these factories—most of which produce gases used for air-conditioning
and refrigeration—have generated tens of millions of dollars in emission credits
every year. The scheme is so lucrative, in fact, that it has triggered a series of
perverse incentives: in some cases, companies can earn twice as much by
destroying an unintentional by-product as they can from making their primary
product, which is itself emissions intensive. In the most egregious instance of
this, selling carbon credits constituted a jaw-dropping 93.4 percent of one
Indian firm’s total revenues in 2012.63
According to one group that petitioned the U.N. to change its policies on
HFC-23 projects, there is “overwhelming evidence that manufacturers are
gaming” the system “by producing more potent greenhouse gases just so they can
get paid to destroy them.”64 But it gets worse: the primary product made by
these factories is a type of coolant that is so damaging to the ozone that it is
being phased out under the Montreal Protocol on ozone depletion.
And this is not some marginal piece of the world emissions market—as of
2012, the U.N. system awarded these coolant manufacturers its largest share of
emission credits, more than any genuinely clean energy projects.65 Since then,

the U.N. has enacted some partial reforms, and the European Union has banned
credits from these factories in its carbon market.
It should hardly be surprising that so many questionable offset projects have
come to dominate the emissions market. The prospect of getting paid real
money based on projections of how much of an invisible substance is kept out of
the air tends to be something of a scam magnet. And the carbon market has
attracted a truly impressive array of grifters and hustlers who scour biologically
rich but economically poor nations like Papua New Guinea, Ecuador, and
Congo, often preying on the isolation of Indigenous people whose forests can be
classified as offsets. These carbon cowboys, as they have come to be called,
arrive bearing aggressive contracts (often written in English, with no
translation) in which large swaths of territory are handed over to conservation
groups on the promise of money for nothing. In the bush of Papua New Guinea,
carbon deals are known as “sky money”; in Madagascar, where the promised
wealth has proved as ephemeral as the product being traded, the Betsimisaraka
people talk of strangers who are “selling the wind.”66
A notorious carbon cowboy is Australian David Nilsson, who runs a
particularly fly-by-night operation; in one recent incarnation, his carbon credit
enterprise reportedly consisted only of an answering service and a web domain.
After Nilsson tried to convince the Matsés people in Peru to sign away their
land rights in exchange for promises of billions in revenues from carbon credits,
a coalition of Indigenous people in the Amazon Basin called for Nilsson to be
expelled from the country. And they alleged that Nilsson’s pitch was “similar to
100 other carbon projects” which were “dividing our people with nonexistent
illusions of being millionaires.”VIII Some Indigenous leaders even say that it is
easier to deal with big oil and mining companies, because at least people
understand who these companies are and what they want; less so when the
organization after your land is a virtuous-seeming NGO and the product it is
trying to purchase is something that cannot be seen or touched.67
This points to a broader problem with offsets, one that reaches beyond the
official trading systems and into a web of voluntary arrangements administered
by large conservation groups in order to unofficially “offset” the emissions of big
polluters. Particularly in the early days of offsetting, after forest conservation
projects began appearing in the late 1980s and early 1990s, by far the most
persistent controversy was that—in the effort to quantify and control how much
carbon was being stored so as to assign a monetary value to the standing trees—
the people who live in or near those forests were sometimes pushed onto

reservation-like parcels, locked out of their previous ways of life.68 This locking
out could be literal, complete with fences and armed men patrolling the
territory looking for trespassers. The NGOs claim that they were merely
attempting to protect the resources and the carbon they represented, but all this
was seen, quite understandably, as a form of land grabbing.
For instance, in Paraná, Brazil, at a project providing offsets for Chevron,
GM, and American Electric Power and administered by The Nature
Conservancy and a Brazilian NGO, Indigenous Guarani were not allowed to
forage for wood or hunt in the places they’d always occupied, or even fish in
nearby waterways. As one local put it, “They want to take our home from us.”
Cressant Rakotomanga, president of a community organization in Madagascar
where the Wildlife Conservation Society is running an offset program, expressed
a similar sentiment. “People are frustrated because before the project, they were
completely free to hunt, fish and cut down the forests.”69
Indeed the offset market has created a new class of “green” human rights
abuses, wherein peasants and Indigenous people who venture into their
traditional territories (reclassified as carbon sinks) in order to harvest plants,
wood, or fish are harassed or worse. There is no comprehensive data available
about these abuses, but the reported incidents are piling up. Near
Guaraqueçaba, Brazil, locals have reported being shot at by park rangers while
they searched the forest for food and plants inside the Paraná offset project
hosted by The Nature Conservancy. “They don’t want human beings in the
forest,” one farmer told the investigative journalist Mark Schapiro. And in a
carbon-offset tree-planting project in Uganda’s Mount Elgon National Park and
Kibale National Park, run by a Dutch organization, villagers described a similar
pattern of being fired upon and having their crops uprooted.70
In the wake of such reports, some of the green groups involved in offsetting
now stress their dedication to Indigenous rights. However, dissatisfaction
remains and controversies continue to crop up. For example, in the Bajo Aguán
region of Honduras, some owners of palm oil plantations have been able to
register a carbon offset project that claims to capture methane. Spurred by the
promise of cash for captured gas, sprawling tree farms have displaced local
agriculture, leading to a violent cycle of land occupations and evictions that has
left as many as a hundred local farmers and their advocates dead as of 2013.
“The way we see it, it has become a crime to be a farmer here,” says Heriberto
Rodríguez of the Unified Campesino Movement of Aguán, which places part of
the blame for the deaths on the carbon market itself. “Whoever gives the

finance to these companies also becomes complicit in all these deaths. If they
cut these funds, the landholders will feel somewhat pressured to change their
methods.”71
Though touted as a classic “win-win” climate solution, there are very few
winners in these farms and forests. In order for multinational corporations to
protect their freedom to pollute the atmosphere, peasants, farmers, and
Indigenous people are losing their freedom to live and sustain themselves in
peace. When the Big Green groups refer to offsets as the “low-hanging fruit” of
climate action, they are in fact making a crude cost-benefit analysis that
concludes that it’s easier to cordon off a forest inhabited by politically weak
people in a poor country than to stop politically powerful corporate emitters in
rich countries—that it’s easier to pick the fruit, in other words, than dig up the
roots.
The added irony is that many of the people being sacrificed for the carbon
market are living some of the most sustainable, low-carbon lifestyles on the
planet. They have strong reciprocal relationships with nature, drawing on local
ecosystems on a small scale while caring for and regenerating the land so it
continues to provide for them and their descendants. An environmental
movement committed to real climate solutions would be looking for ways to
support these ways of life—not severing deep traditions of stewardship and
pushing more people to become rootless urban consumers.
Chris Lang, a British environmentalist based in Jakarta who runs an offset
watchdog website called REDD-Monitor, told me that he never thought his job
would involve exposing the failings of the green movement. “I hate the idea of
the environmental movement fighting among itself instead of fighting the oil
companies,” he said. “It’s just that these groups don’t seem to have any desire to
take on the oil companies, and with some of them, I’m not sure they really are
environmentalists at all.”72
This is not to say that every project being awarded carbon credits is somehow
fraudulent or actively destructive to local ways of life. Wind farms and solar
arrays are being built, and some forests classified as offsets are being preserved.
The problem is that by adopting this model of financing, even the very best
green projects are being made ineffective as climate responses because for every
ton of carbon dioxide the developers keep out of the atmosphere, a corporation
in the industrialized world is able to pump a ton into the air, using offsets to

claim the pollution has been neutralized. One step forward, one step back. At
best, we are running in place. And as we will see, there are other, far more
effective ways to fund green development than the international carbon market.
Geographer Bram Büscher coined the term “liquid nature” to refer to what
these market mechanisms are doing to the natural world. As he describes it, the
trees, meadows, and mountains lose their intrinsic, place-based meaning and
become deracinated, virtual commodities in a global trading system. The
carbon-sequestering potential of biotic life is virtually poured into polluting
industries like gas into a car’s tank, allowing them to keep on emitting. Once
absorbed into this system, a pristine forest may look as lush and alive as ever, but
it has actually become an extension of a dirty power plant on the other side of
the planet, attached by invisible financial transactions. Polluting smoke may
not be billowing from the tops of its trees but it may as well be, since the trees
that have been designated as carbon offsets are now allowing that pollution to
take place elsewhere.73
The mantra of the early ecologists was “everything is connected”—every tree
a part of an intricate web of life. The mantra of the corporate-partnered
conservationists, in sharp contrast, may as well be “everything is disconnected,”
since they have successfully constructed a new economy in which the tree is not
a tree but rather a carbon sink used by people thousands of miles away to
appease our consciences and maintain our levels of economic growth.
But the biggest problem with this approach is that carbon markets have failed
even on their own terms, as markets. In Europe, the problems began with the
decision to entice companies and countries to join the market by handing out a
huge number of cheap carbon permits. When the economic crisis hit a few years
later, it caused production and consumption to contract and emissions to drop
on their own. That meant the new emissions market was drowning in excess
permits, which in turn caused the price of carbon to drop dramatically (in 2013,
a ton of carbon was trading for less than €4, compared to the target price of
€20). That left little incentive to shift away from dirty energy or to buy carbon
credits. Which helps explain why, in 2012, coal’s share of the U.K.’s electricity
production rose by more than 30 percent, while in Germany, as we have already
seen, emissions from coal went up despite the country’s rapid embrace of
renewable power. Meanwhile, the United Nations Clean Development
Mechanism has fared even worse: indeed it has “essentially collapsed,” in the
words of a report commissioned by the U.N. itself. “Weak emissions targets and
the economic downturn in wealthy nations resulted in a 99 percent decline in

carbon credit prices between 2008 and 2013,” explains Oscar Reyes, an expert
on climate finance at the Institute for Policy Studies.74
This is a particularly extreme example of the boom-and-bust cycle of
markets, which are volatile and high-risk by nature. And that’s the central flaw
with this so-called solution: it is simply too risky, and time is too short, for us to
put our collective fate in such an inconstant and unreliable force. John Kerry
has likened the threat of climate change to a “weapon of mass destruction,” and
it’s a fair analogy.75 But if climate change poses risks on par with nuclear war,
then why are we not responding with the seriousness that that comparison
implies? Why aren’t we ordering companies to stop putting our future at risk,
instead of bribing and cajoling them? Why are we gambling?
Tired of this time wasting, in February 2013, more than 130 environmental
and economic justice groups called for the abolition of the largest carbontrading system in the world, the EU’s Emissions Trading System (ETS), in order
“to make room for climate measures that work.” The declaration stated that,
seven years into this experiment, “The ETS has not reduced greenhouse gas
emissions . . . the worst polluters have had little to no obligation to cut
emissions at source. Indeed, offset projects have resulted in an increase of
emissions worldwide: even conservative sources estimate that between 1/3 and
2/3 of carbon credits bought into the ETS ‘do not represent real carbon
reductions.’ ”76
The system has also allowed power companies and others to pass on the cost
of compliance to their consumers, especially in the early years of the market,
leading to a 2008 estimate by Point Carbon of windfall profits between $32 and
$99 billion for electric utilities in the U.K., Germany, Spain, Italy, and Poland
over a span of just five years. One report found airline companies raked in a
windfall of up to $1.8 billion in their first year on the market in 2012. In short,
rather than getting the polluters to pay for the mess they have created—a basic
principle of environmental justice—taxpayers and ratepayers have heaped cash
on them and for a scheme that hasn’t even worked.77
In the context of the European debacle, the fact that the U.S. Senate failed to
pass climate legislation in 2009 should not be seen, as it often is, as the climate
movement’s greatest defeat, but rather as a narrowly dodged bullet. The capand-trade bills under consideration in the U.S. House and Senate in Obama’s

first term would have repeated all the errors of the European and U.N. emission
trading systems, and then added some new ones of their own.
Both laws were based on proposals crafted by a coalition put together by the
Environmental Defense Fund’s Fred Krupp, which had brought large polluters
(General Electric, Dow Chemical, Alcoa, ConocoPhillips, BP, Shell, the coal
giant Duke Energy, DuPont, and many more) together with a handful of Big
Green groups (The Nature Conservancy, the National Wildlife Federation, the
Natural Resources Defense Council, the World Resources Institute, and what
was then called the Pew Center on Global Climate Change). Known as the
United States Climate Action Partnership (USCAP), the coalition had been
guided by the familiar defeatist logic that there is no point trying to take on the
big emitters directly so it’s better to try to get them onside with a plan laden
with corporate handouts and loopholes.78
The deal that ultimately emerged out of USCAP—touted as a historic
compromise between greens and industry—handed out enough free allowances
to cover 90 percent of emissions from energy utilities, including coal plants,
meaning they could keep on emitting that amount and pay no price at all.
“We’re not going to get a better deal,” Duke Energy’s then CEO Jim Rogers
boasted. “Ninety percent is terrific.” Congressman Rick Boucher, a Democrat
representing coal-rich southwestern Virginia, gushed that the bill had so many
giveaways that it “ushered in a new golden age of coal.”79
These “free allowances” to burn or trade carbon were, in essence, bribes. As
solar entrepreneur Jigar Shah put it: “When you look at these companies that
were in USCAP, they were not interested in regulating carbon. They were
interested in a huge amount of wealth being transferred to their companies in
exchange for their vote on climate change.”80 Needless to say, a deal that made
fossil fuel interests this happy would have brought us nowhere near the deep
cuts to our greenhouse gas emissions that scientists tell us are required to have a
good chance of keeping warming below 2 degrees Celsius. And yet the green
groups in USCAP didn’t merely stand back and let the corporations in a direct
conflict of interest write U.S. climate policy—they actively recruited them to do
so.
And the saddest irony in all this pandering is that it still wasn’t enough for
the polluters. Working with USCAP to help draft climate legislation was, for
many of the big corporate players who joined the coalition, a hedge. In 2007,
when the coalition was formed, climate legislation looked extremely likely, and
these companies wanted to be sure that whatever bill passed Congress was

riddled with enough loopholes to be essentially meaningless—a classic Beltway
strategy. They also knew that getting behind cap-and-trade was the best way of
blocking the worrying prospect of a newly elected president using the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to put firm limits on the amount of
carbon companies could emit. In fact, Waxman-Markey, the primary piece of
climate legislation based on the coalition’s blueprint, specifically barred the
EPA from regulating carbon from many major pollution sources, including coalfired power plants. Michael Parr, senior manager of government affairs at
DuPont, summarized the corporate strategy succinctly: “You’re either at the
table or on the menu.”81
The problem for Fred Krupp and his colleagues was that these companies
were sitting at plenty of other tables at the same time. Many continued to be
members of the American Petroleum Institute, the National Association of
Manufacturers, and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce—all of which actively
opposed climate legislation. When Barack Obama took office in January 2009, it
looked like the corporate hard-liners were going to lose. But then, in the
summer of 2009, with USCAP still trying to push cap-and-trade through the
U.S. Senate, the political climate abruptly shifted. The economy was still deeply
troubled, Obama’s popularity was tanking, and a new political force came to
centerstage. Flush with oil money from the Koch brothers and pumped up by
Fox News, the Tea Party stormed town-hall meetings across the country,
shouting about how Obama’s health-care reform was part of a sinister plan to
turn the United States into an Islamic/Nazi/socialist utopia. In short order, the
president started sending signals that he was reluctant to pick another major
legislative fight.82
That’s when many of the key corporate members of USCAP began to realize
that they now had a solid chance of scuttling climate legislation altogether.
Caterpillar and BP dropped out of the coalition, as did ConocoPhillips, after
having complained of “unrecoverable costs . . . on what is historically a lowmargin business.” (ConocoPhillips revenues the year after it left USCAP totaled
$66 billion, with a tidy net income of $12.4 billion.) And some of these
companies didn’t just leave Krupp’s coalition of “former enemies”: by directing
their formidable firepower squarely at the legislation that they had helped craft,
they made it abundantly clear that they had never stopped being its enemies.
ConocoPhillips, for instance, set up a dedicated webpage to encourage visitors
(including its roughly thirty thousand employees) to tell legislators how much
they opposed the climate bill. “Climate change legislation will result in higher

direct energy costs for the typical American family,” the site warned, further
claiming (outlandishly) that it “could result in a net loss of more than two
million U.S. jobs each year.” As for fellow defector BP, company spokesman
Ronnie Chappell explained, “The lowest-cost option for reducing emissions is
the increased use of natural gas.”83
In other words, thinking they were playing a savvy inside game, Big Green
was outmaneuvered on a grand scale. The environmentalists who participated in
USCAP disastrously misread the political landscape. They chose a stunningly
convoluted approach to tackling climate change, one that would have blocked
far more effective strategies, specifically because it was more appealing to big
emitters—only to discover that the most appealing climate policy to polluters
remained none at all. Worse, once their corporate partners fled the coalition,
they had no shortage of ammo to fire at their former friends. The climate bill
was a boondoggle, they claimed (it was), filled with handouts and subsidies
(absolutely), and it would pass on higher energy costs to cash-strapped
consumers (likely).IX To top it all off, as pro-oil Republican congressman Joe
Barton put it, “The environmental benefit is nonexistent” (as the left flank of
the green movement had been saying all along).84
It was a classic double-cross, and it worked. In January 2010, the climate
legislation modeled on USCAP’s proposals died in the Senate, as it deserved to
—but not before it discredited the very idea of climate action in the minds of
many.85
Plenty of postmortems have been written about what the greens did wrong in
the cap-and-trade fight but the hardest hitting came in a scathing report by
Harvard University sociologist Theda Skocpol. She concluded that a major
barrier to success was the absence of a mass movement applying pressure from
below. “To counter fierce political opposition, reformers will have to build
organizational networks across the country, and they will need to orchestrate
sustained political efforts that stretch far beyond friendly Congressional offices,
comfy boardrooms, and posh retreats.”86 As we will see, a resurgent grassroots
climate movement has now arrived that is doing precisely that—and it is
winning a series of startling victories against the fossil fuel sector as a result.
But old habits die hard. When the cap-and-trade fight in the U.S. Congress
was finally over, with around half a billion dollars spent pushing the policy
(ultimately down the drain), the man who led the pro-business revolution in the

green movement offered his version of what went wrong. Fred Krupp—in a
sharp gray suit, his well-styled hair now white after two and a half decades
leading the Environmental Defense Fund—explained that climate legislation
had failed because greens had been too hard-line, too “shrill,” and needed to be
more “humble” and more bipartisan.87 In other words, compromise some more,
tone it down even further, assert ideas with less confidence, and try to be even
more palatable to their opponents. Never mind that that is precisely what
groups like EDF have been doing since Reagan.
Fittingly enough, Krupp chose to share these pearls of wisdom during the
annual Brainstorm Green session hosted by Fortune, a magazine devoted to the
celebration of wealth, and sponsored by, among others, Shell Oil.88

I. By 2011, the situation had become so surreal that Conservation International (CI) was the target of an
embarrassing prank. A couple of activist/journalists posed as executives of the weapons giant Lockheed
Martin and told the director of corporate relations for CI that they were looking for help greening their
company’s image. Rather than cutting their emissions, they said they were thinking of sponsoring an
endangered species. Without missing a beat, the CI representative was recorded helpfully suggesting a bird
of prey, to make the “link with aviation.” (“We do not help companies with their image,” CI later
maintained, stressing that Lockheed would have needed to undergo a “due diligence process.”)
II. After my article on the subject appeared in The Nation, The Nature Conservancy adopted a policy to
“divest from companies that derive a significant percentage of their revenue from fossil fuels with the
highest carbon content and will support a shift to carbon-free energy in the longer term.”
III. It’s worth keeping this history in mind when free market ideologues treat a cleaner environment as a
natural stage in capitalist development. In fact it is the result of specific sets of regulations, ones that run
directly counter to hard-right ideology.
IV. By the end of the 1980s, the majority of self-identified Republicans were telling pollsters that they
thought there was “too little” spent protecting the environment. By 1990, the percentage of Republicans
who agreed with that statement topped 70 percent.
V. Indeed the worlds of finance and Big Green would become so entangled in the years to come—
between donations, board members, and partnerships—that when The Nature Conservancy needed a new
CEO in 2008, it recruited not from within the nonprofit world but from Goldman Sachs. Its current
director, Mark Tercek, had been working at the notorious investment bank for some twenty-five years
before moving over to the NGO, where he has consistently advanced a model of conservation based on
bringing ever more parts of the natural world into the market.
VI. This is one of the many ironies of the Heartlanders’ claim that greens are closet socialists. If so, then
they are deep in the closet. In reality, many mainstream environmentalists bristle at the suggestion that
they are part of the left at all, fearing (correctly) that such an identification would hurt their chances with
foundation funders and corporate donors. Far from using climate change as a tool to alter the American
way of life, many of the large environmental organizations spend their days doing everything in their power
to furiously protect that way of life, at the direct expense of demanding the levels of change required by
science.

VII. The Nature Conservancy, ever the envelope pusher, has been particularly enthusiastic in this regard,
hiring its chief marketing officer straight from World Wrestling Entertainment and participating in the
marketing frenzy that accompanied the release of Universal Pictures’ film version of The Lorax (which used
Dr. Seuss’s anti-consumerism classic to hawk IHOP pancakes and Mazda SUVs). In 2012, the conservancy
managed to outrage many of its female staffers by partnering with the online luxury goods retailer Gilt to
promote the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Edition (the magazine explained that “whether you decide to buy a
bikini, surfboards or tickets to celebrate at our parties, any money you spend . . . will help The Nature
Conservancy ensure we have beaches to shoot Swimsuit on for another half-century”).
VIII. Interestingly, before Nilsson got into the carbon game, he was investigated by a member of
Queensland’s parliament for selling what appeared to be entirely fictional Australian real estate to unlucky
marks in none other than Nauru.
IX. Heartland regular Chris Horner called the bill “crony capitalism” on the Enron model—and Horner
should know, because he used to work there.

7

NO MESSIAHS
The Green Billionaires Won’t Save Us
“I had always got away with breaking rules and thought this was no different. I would have
got away with it as well if I hadn’t been greedy.”
—Richard Branson, on getting caught dodging taxes in the early 1970s1

“You gotta lead from the front. Nobody is going to start it from the grassroots.”
—Former New York mayor Michael Bloomberg, 20132

In his autobiography/New Age business manifesto Screw It, Let’s Do It, Richard
Branson, the flamboyant founder of Virgin Group, shared the inside story of
what he describes as his “Road to Damascus” conversion to the fight against
climate change. It was 2006 and Al Gore, on tour with An Inconvenient Truth,
came to the billionaire’s home to impress upon him the dangers of global
warming, and to try to convince Branson to use Virgin Airlines as a catalyst for
change.3
“It was quite an experience having a brilliant communicator like Al Gore
give me a personal PowerPoint presentation,” Branson writes of the meeting.
“Not only was it one of the best presentations I have ever seen in my life, but it
was profoundly disturbing to become aware that we are potentially facing the
end of the world as we know it. . . . As I sat there and listened to Gore, I saw
that we were looking at Armageddon.”4
As he tells it, Branson’s first move following his terrifying epiphany was to
summon Will Whitehorn, then Virgin Group’s corporate and brand
development director. Together “we carefully discussed these issues and took the
decision to change the way Virgin operates on a corporate and global level. We

called this new Virgin approach to business Gaia Capitalism in honor of James
Lovelock and his revolutionary scientific view” (a reference to Lovelock’s
theory that the earth is “one single enormous living organism and every single
part of the ecosystem reacted with every other part”). Not only would Gaia
Capitalism “help Virgin to make a real difference in the next decade and not be
ashamed to make money at the same time,” but Branson believed it held the
potential to become “a new way of doing business on a global level.”5
Before the year was out, he was ready to make his grand entrance onto the
green scene (and Branson knows how to make an entrance—by parachute, by
hot air balloon, by Jet Ski, by kite-sail with a naked model clinging to his
back . . . ). At the 2006 Clinton Global Initiative annual meeting in New York
City—the highest power event on the philanthropic calendar—Branson
pledged to spend roughly $3 billion over the next decade to develop biofuels as
an alternative to oil and gas, and on other technologies to battle climate
change. The sum alone was staggering but the most elegant part was where the
money would be coming from: Branson would divert the funds from profits
generated by Virgin’s fossil fuel–burning transportation lines. As Branson
explained in an interview, “Any dividends or share sales or any money that we
make from our airlines or trains will be ploughed back into tackling global
warming, into investing in finding new, clean fuels and investing in trying to
find fuels for jet engines so that we can hopefully reverse the inevitability of,
you know, of destroying the world if we let it carry on the way it’s going.”6
In short, Branson was volunteering to do precisely what our governments
have been unwilling to legislate—require that the profits being earned from
warming the planet be channeled into the costly transition away from these
dangerous energy sources. The director of the Natural Resources Defense
Council’s Move America Beyond Oil campaign said of Virgin’s renewable
energy initiatives, “This is exactly what the whole industry should be looking
at.” Furthermore, Branson pledged that if its transportation divisions weren’t
profitable enough to meet the $3 billion target, “the money will come out of our
existing businesses.” He would do “whatever it takes” to fulfill the commitment
because “what is the point of holding back when there will be no businesses” if
we fail to act?7
Bill Clinton was dazzled, calling the $3 billion pledge “groundbreaking, not
only because of the price tag—which is phenomenal—but also because of the
statement that he is making.” The New Yorker described it as “by far the biggest
such commitment that has yet been made to fight global warming.”8

But Branson wasn’t finished. A year later he was back in the news with the
“Virgin Earth Challenge”—a $25 million prize that would go to the first
inventor to figure out how to sequester one billion tons of carbon a year from
the air “without countervailing harmful effects.” He described it as “the largest
ever science and technology prize to be offered in history.” This, Branson
pronounced, was “the best way to find a solution to the problem of climate
change,” elaborating in an official statement that, “If the greatest minds in the
world today compete, as I’m sure they will, for The Virgin Earth Challenge, I
believe that a solution to the CO2 problem could hopefully be found—a
solution that could save our planet—not only for our children but for all the
children yet to come.”9
And the best part, he said, is that if these competing geniuses crack the
carbon code, the “ ‘doom and gloom’ scenario vanishes. We can carry on living
our lives in a pretty normal way—we can drive our cars, we can fly our planes,
life can carry on as normal.”10 Indeed the idea that we can solve the climate
crisis without having to change our lifestyles in any way—certainly not by
taking fewer Virgin flights—seemed to be the underlying assumption of all of
Branson’s various climate initiatives.
With the $3 billion pledge, he would try to invent a low carbon fuel that
could keep his airlines running at full capacity. If that failed, and carbon still
needed to be burned to keep the planes in the air, then the prize would surely
help invent a way to suck the heat-trapping gas out of the sky before it’s too
late. To cover one more base, in 2009 Branson launched the Carbon War
Room, an industry group looking for ways that different sectors could lower their
emissions voluntarily, and save money in the process. “Carbon is the enemy,”
Branson declared. “Let’s attack it in any possible way we can, or many people
will die just like in any war.”11

Billionaires and Broken Dreams
For many mainstream greens, Branson seemed to be a dream come true: a flashy,
media-darling billionaire out to show the world that fossil-fuel-intensive
companies can lead the way to a green future using profit as the most potent
tool—and proving just how serious he was by putting striking amounts of his
own cash on the line. As Branson explained to Time, “If the government can’t
deliver, it’s up to industries to [do it] themselves. We have to make it a win-win

for all concerned.”12 This is what groups like the Environmental Defense Fund
had been saying since the 1980s in explaining why they partnered with big
polluters, and what they had attempted to prove with the carbon market. But
never before had there been a single figure willing to use his own multibilliondollar empire as a test case. Branson’s personal account of the impact of Gore’s
PowerPoint also seemed to confirm the notion, cherished in many green circles,
that transforming the economy away from fossil fuels is not about confronting
the rich and powerful but simply about reaching them with sufficiently
persuasive facts and figures and appealing to their sense of humanity.
There had been major green philanthropists before. Men like financier
Jeremy Grantham, who underwrites a large portion of the U.S. and British green
movement, as well as a lot of related academic research, with wealth from
Grantham, Mayo, Van Otterloo & Co., the investment management firm he
cofounded.I But these funders tended to stay behind the scenes. And unlike
Branson, Grantham has not attempted to turn his own financial firm into proof
that the quest for short-term profits can be reconciled with his personal
concerns about ecological collapse. On the contrary, Grantham is known for his
bleak quarterly letters, in which he has mused on our economic model’s
collision course with the planet. “Capitalism, by ignoring the finite nature of
resources and by neglecting the long-term well-being of the planet and its
potentially crucial biodiversity, threatens our existence,” Grantham wrote in
2012—but that doesn’t mean savvy investors can’t get very rich on the way
down, both from the final scramble for fossil fuels, and by setting themselves up
as disaster capitalists.13
Take Warren Buffett, for instance. For a brief time, he too seemed to be
auditioning for the role of Great Green Hope, stating, in 2007, that, “the odds
are good that global warming is serious” and that even if there is a chance it
won’t be “you have to build the ark before the rains come. If you have to make a
mistake, err on the side of the planet. Build a margin of safety to take care of the
only planet we have.”14 But it soon became clear that Buffett was not interested
in applying this logic to his own corporate assets. On the contrary, Berkshire
Hathaway has done its best in subsequent years to make sure those rains come
with ferocity.
Buffett owns several huge coal-burning utilities and holds large stakes in
ExxonMobil and the tar sands giant Suncor. Most significantly, in 2009 Buffett
announced that his company would spend $26 billion to buy what it didn’t
already own of the Burlington Northern Santa Fe railroad. Buffett called the

deal—the largest in Berkshire Hathaway history—“a bet on the country.”15 It
was also a bet on coal: BNSF is one of the biggest coal haulers in the United
States and one of the primary engines behind the drive to greatly expand coal
exports to China.
Investments like these push us further down the road toward catastrophic
warming, of course—and Buffett is poised to be one of the biggest winners there
too. That’s because he is a major player in the reinsurance business, the part of
the insurance sector that stands to profit most from climate disruption. As Eli
Lehrer, the insurance industry advocate who defected from the Heartland
Institute after its controversial billboard campaign, explains, “A large reinsurer
like Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway might simultaneously underwrite the
risk of an industrial accident in Japan, a flood in the U.K., a hurricane in
Florida, and a cyclone in Australia. Since there’s almost no chance that all of
these events will happen at the same time, the reinsurer can profit from the
premiums it earns on one type of coverage even when it pays out mammoth
claims on another.” Perhaps it’s worth remembering that Noah’s Ark was not
built to hold everyone, but just the lucky few.16
The newest billionaire raising big hopes in the climate scene is Tom Steyer, a
major donor to various climate and anti–tar sands campaigns, as well as to the
Democratic Party. Steyer, who made his fortune with the fossil-fuel-heavy hedge
fund Farallon Capital Management, has made some serious attempts to bring his
business dealings in line with his climate concerns. But unlike Branson, Steyer
has done this by leaving the business that he founded, precisely because, as The
Globe and Mail reported, “it valued a company’s bottom line, not its carbon
footprint.” He further explained, “I have a passion to push for what I believe is
the right thing. And I couldn’t do it in good conscience and hold down a job—
and get paid very well for doing a job—where I wasn’t directly doing the right
thing.”II This stance is very different from Branson’s, who is actively trying to
prove that it is possible for a fossil-fuel–based company not just to do the right
thing but to lead the transition to a clean economy.17
Nor is Branson in precisely the same category as Michael Bloomberg and Bill
Gates, who have both used their philanthropy to aggressively shape the kinds of
climate solutions on offer. Bloomberg, for instance, has been held up as a hero
for his large donations to green groups like the Sierra Club and EDF, and for the
supposedly enlightened climate policies he introduced while mayor of New York
City.III18

But while talking a good game about carbon bubbles and stranded assets (his
company is set to introduce the “Bloomberg Carbon Risk Valuation Tool” to
provide data and analysis to its clients about how fossil fuel stocks would be
impacted by a range of climate actions), Bloomberg has made no discernible
attempt to manage his own vast wealth in a manner that reflects these concerns.
On the contrary, as previously mentioned, he helped set up Willett Advisors, a
firm specializing in oil and gas assets, for both his personal and philanthropic
holdings. Brad Briner, director of real assets for Willett, stated plainly in May
2013 that, “We are natural gas bulls. We think oil is well priced,” citing new
drilling investments on the horizon.19
It’s not simply that Bloomberg is actively snapping up fossil fuel assets even
as he funds reports warning that climate change makes for “risky business.” It’s
that those gas assets may well have increased in value as a result of Bloomberg’s
environmental giving, what with EDF championing natural gas as a replacement
for coal and the Sierra Club spending tens of millions of Bloomberg’s dollars
shutting down coal plants. Was funding the war on coal at least partially about
boosting the share price of gas? Or was that just a bonus? Perhaps there is no
connection between his philanthropic priorities and his decision to entrust so
much of his fortune to the oil and gas sector. But these investment choices do
raise uncomfortable questions about Bloomberg’s status as a climate hero, as well
as his 2014 appointment as a United Nations special envoy for cities and
climate change (questions Bloomberg has not answered despite repeated
requests). At the very least, they demonstrate that seeing the risks climate
change poses to financial markets in the long term may not be enough to curtail
the temptation to profit from planet destabilization in the short-term.20
Bill Gates has a similar firewall between mouth and money. Though he
professes great concern about climate change, the Gates Foundation had at least
$1.2 billion invested in just two oil giants, BP and ExxonMobil, as of December
2013, and those are only the beginning of his fossil fuel holdings.21
Gates’s approach to the climate crisis, meanwhile, shares a fair amount with
Branson’s. When Gates had his climate change epiphany, he too immediately
raced to the prospect of a silver-bullet techno-fix in the future, without pausing
to consider viable—if economically challenging—responses in the here and
now. In TED Talks, op-eds, interviews, and in his much-discussed annual
letters, Gates repeats his call for governments to massively increase spending on
research and development with the goal of uncovering “energy miracles.” By
miracles, Gates means nuclear reactors that have yet to be invented (he is a

major investor and chairman of nuclear start-up TerraPower); he means
machines to suck carbon out of the atmosphere (he is also a primary investor in
at least one such prototype); and he means direct climate manipulation (Gates
has spent millions of his own money funding research into various schemes to
block the sun, and his name is listed on several hurricane-suppression patents).
At the same time, he has been dismissive of the potential of existing renewable
technologies. “We focus too much on deployment of stuff that we have today,”
Gates claims, writing off energy solutions like rooftop solar as “cute” and
“noneconomic” (despite the fact that these cute technologies are already
providing 25 percent of Germany’s electricity).22
The real difference between Gates and Branson is that Branson still has a
hands-on leadership role at Virgin and Gates left the top job at Microsoft years
ago. Which is why when Branson entered the climate fray, he was really in a
category of his own—promising to turn a major multinational, one with fossil
fuels at its center, into an engine for building the next economy. The only other
figure who had raised similar hopes was the brash Texas oilman T. Boone
Pickens. In 2008, he launched “The Pickens Plan,” which, backed by a huge
advertising budget in print and television, promised to end U.S. dependence on
foreign oil by massively boosting wind and solar, and converting vehicles to
natural gas. “I’ve been an oil man my whole life,” Pickens said in his
commercials, with his heavy Texas twang. “But this is one emergency we can’t
drill our way out of.”23
The kind of policies and subsidies Pickens was advocating were ones from
which the billionaire’s energy hedge fund, BP Capital, was poised to profit—but
for the greens cheering him on, that wasn’t the point. Carl Pope, then heading
the Sierra Club, joined the billionaire on his private Gulfstream jet to help him
sell the plan to reporters. “To put it plainly, T. Boone Pickens is out to save
America,” he pronounced.24
Or not. Shortly after Pickens’s announcement, the fracking frenzy took off,
and suddenly powering the grid with unconventional natural gas looked a lot
more appealing to BP Capital than relying on wind. Within a couple of years
the Pickens Plan had radically changed. It now had almost nothing to do with
renewable energy and everything to do with pushing for more gas extraction no
matter the cost. “You’re stuck with hydrocarbons—come on, get real,” Pickens
told a group of reporters in April 2011, while questioning the seriousness of
human-caused global warming to boot. By 2012, he was extolling the virtues of
the tar sands and the Keystone XL pipeline. As David Friedman, then research

director for the Clean Vehicles Program at the Union of Concerned Scientists,
put it: Pickens “kept saying that this wasn’t about private interests, it was about
the nation and the world. But to dump the part that actually had the greatest
potential to cut global warming and pollution and help create new jobs in the
U.S., in favor of the piece that really does most benefit his bottom line, was a
disappointment.”25
Which leaves us with Branson—his pledge, his prize, and his broader vision of
voluntarily changing capitalism so that it is in keeping with the laws of “Gaia.”
Almost a decade after Branson’s PowerPoint epiphany, it seems like a good time
to check in on the “win-win” crusade. It’s too much to expect Branson to have
changed the way business is done in less than a decade, of course. But given the
hype, it does seem fair to examine how his attempts to prove that industry can
lead us away from climate catastrophe without heavy government intervention
have progressed. Because given the dismal track record of his fellow green
billionaires on that front, it may be fair to conclude that if Branson can’t do it,
no one can.

The Pledge That Turned into a “Gesture”
Let’s start with Branson’s “firm commitment” to spend $3 billion over a decade
developing a miracle fuel. Despite press reports portraying the pledge as a gift,
the original concept was more like straight-up vertical integration. And
integration is Branson’s hallmark: the first Virgin business was record sales, but
Branson built his global brand by making sure that he not only owned the music
stores, but the studio where the bands recorded, and the record label that
represented them. Now he was applying the same logic to his airlines. Why pay
Shell and Exxon to power Virgin planes and trains when Virgin could invent its
own transport fuel? If it worked, the gambit would not only turn Branson into
an environmental hero but also make him a whole lot richer.
So the first tranche of money Branson diverted from his transportation
divisions went to launch a new Virgin business, originally called Virgin Fuels
and since replaced by a private equity firm called the Virgin Green Fund. In
keeping with his pledge, Branson started off by investing in various agrofuel
businesses, including making a very large bet of roughly $130 million on corn
ethanol.IV And Virgin has attached its name to several biofuel pilot projects—

one to derive jet fuel from eucalyptus trees, another from fermented gas waste—
though it has not gone in as an investor. (Instead it mainly offers PR support,
and a pledge to purchase the fuel if it becomes viable.) But by Branson’s own
admission, the miracle fuel he was looking for “hasn’t been invented yet” and
the biofuels sector has stalled, thanks in part to the influx of fracked oil and gas.
In response to written interview questions, Branson conceded, “It’s increasingly
clear that this is a question of creating the market conditions that would allow a
diverse portfolio of different renewable fuel producers, suppliers and customers
to all work in the same way that conventional fuel supply chains work today. It’s
one of the issues that the Carbon War Room’s renewable jet fuels operation is
looking to solve.”26
Perhaps this is why Branson’s green investment initiative appears to have lost
much of its early interest in alternative fuels. Today, the Virgin Green Fund
continues to invest in one biofuel company, but the rest of its investments are a
grab bag of vaguely green-hued projects, from water desalination to energyefficient lighting, to an in-car monitoring system to help drivers conserve gas.
Evan Lovell, a partner in the Virgin Green Fund, acknowledged in an interview
that the search for a breakthrough fuel has given way to a “much more
incremental” approach, one with fewer risks and more short-term return.27
Diversifying his holdings to get a piece of the green market is Branson’s
prerogative, of course. But hundreds of venture capitalists have made the same
hedge, as have all the major investment banks. It hardly would seem to merit
the fanfare inspired by Branson’s original announcement. Especially because the
investments themselves have been so unremarkable. Jigar Shah, a Branson
supporter who ran the Carbon War Room, is frank about this: “I don’t think
that he’s made a lot of great investments in the climate change space. But the
fact that he’s passionate about it is a good thing.”28
Then there is the small matter of dollar amounts. When Branson made his
pledge, he said that he would “invest 100 percent of all future proceeds of the
Virgin Group from our transportation businesses into tackling global warming
for an estimated value of $3 billion over the next 10 years.”29 That was 2006. If
Branson is to make it to $3 billion by 2016, by this point, at least $2 billion
should have been spent. He’s not even close.
In 2010—four years into the pledge—Branson told The Economist that he
had so far only invested “two or three hundred million dollars in clean energy,”
blaming poor profits in the airline sector. In February 2014, he told The Observer
that “we have invested hundreds of millions in clean technology projects.” Not

much progress, in other words. And it may be even less: according to Virgin
Green Fund partner Lovell, Virgin has still only contributed around $100
million (outsider investors had matched that), on top of the original ethanol
investment, which as of 2013, brings the total Branson investment to something
around $230 million. (Lovell confirmed that “we are the primary vehicle” for
Branson’s promise.) Add to that an undisclosed, but likely modest personal
investment in an algae company called Solazyme, and we are still looking at
well under $300 million dollars, seven years into the ten-year pledge that is
supposed to reach $3 billion. As of this writing, no major new investments had
been announced.30
Branson refused to answer direct questions about how much he had spent,
writing that “it’s very hard to quantify the total amount we’ve invested in
relation to climate change across the Group,” and his labyrinthine holdings
make it hard to come up with independent estimates. “I’m not very good with
figures,” the billionaire has said about another murky corner of Virgin’s empire,
adding “I failed my elementary maths.” Part of the confusion stems from the fact
that it’s unclear what should be counted toward the original $3 billion pledge. It
began as a targeted quest for a miracle green fuel, then expanded to become a
search for clean technologies generally, then, apparently, eco-anything. Branson
now says that he is counting “investments made by individual Virgin companies
in sustainability measures, such as more efficient fleets” of planes. More
recently, Branson’s fight against global warming has centered around various
attempts to “green” his two private islands in the Caribbean, one of which
serves as his deluxe family compound and the other a $60,000 a night hotel.
Branson claims the model he is setting will help nearby Caribbean nations to
switch to renewable power themselves. Perhaps it will, but it’s all a long way
from the pledge to transform capitalism back in 2006.31
The Virgin boss now plays down his original commitment, no longer
referring to it as a “pledge” but rather a “gesture.” In 2009, he told Wired
magazine, “In a sense, whether it’s $2 billion, $3 billion or $4 billion is not
particularly relevant.” Branson told me that when the deadline rolls around, “I
suspect it will be less than $1 billion right now.” That too may prove an
exaggeration: if the publicly available information is correct, he would have to
more than triple the green energy investments he has made so far. When asked,
Branson blamed the shortfall on everything from high oil prices to the global
financial crisis: “The world was quite different back in 2006. . . . In the last eight
years our airlines have lost hundreds of millions of dollars.”32

Given these various explanations for falling short, it is worth taking a look at
some of the things for which Richard Branson and Virgin did manage to find
money in this key period. Like, for instance, a massive global push to put more
carbon-spewing planes in the skies adorned with stylized “V”s on their tails.
When Branson met with Al Gore he warned the former vice president that
however alarmed he became about what he learned about climate change, he
was about to launch a new air route to Dubai and wasn’t about to change that.
That wasn’t the half of it. In 2007, just one year after seeing the climate light
with Gore and deciding, as he put it, that “my new goal in life is to work at
reducing carbon emissions,” Branson launched his most ambitious venture in
years: Virgin America, a brand-new airline competing in the U.S. domestic
market. Even by the standards of a new venture, Virgin America’s growth rates
in its first five years have been startling: from forty flights a day to five
destinations in its first year, it reached 177 flights a day to twenty-three
destinations in 2013. And the airline has plans to add forty more planes to its
fleet by the middle of the next decade. In 2010, The Globe and Mail reported
that Virgin America was heading for “the most aggressive expansion of any
North American airline in an era when most domestic carriers have been
retrenching.”33
Branson’s capacity to expand so quickly has been boosted by rock-bottom
seat sales, including offering tickets for just $60.34 With prices like that,
Branson was not just poaching passengers from United and American, he was
getting more people up in the air. The new airline, however, has been a hugely
costly endeavor, generating hundreds of millions in losses. Bad news for the
Green Fund, which needed Virgin’s transportation businesses to do well in order
to get topped up.
Branson hasn’t only been expanding his transportation businesses in the
Americas. The number of people flying on various Virgin-branded Australian
airlines increased by 27 percent in the five years following his climate pledge,
from fifteen million passengers in 2007 to nineteen million in 2012. And in
2009, he launched a whole new long-haul airline, V Australia. Then, in April
2013, Branson unveiled yet another ambitious new venture: Little Red, a
domestic airline for the U.K., starting with twenty-six flights a day. In true
Branson style, when he launched the new airline in Edinburgh, he dressed in a
kilt and flashed his underwear to reporters, which he had emblazoned with the

words “stiff competition.”V But as with Virgin America, this was not just about
competing with rivals for existing fliers: Virgin was so keen on expanding the
number of people who could use the most carbon-intensive form of
transportation that it offered a celebratory seat sale for some flights that charged
customers no fares at all, only taxes—which came to about half the price of a
cab from central London to Heathrow during rush hour.35
So this is what Branson has done on his climate change Road to Damascus:
he went on an airplane-procurement spree. When Virgin’s various expansions
are tallied up, around 160 hardworking planes have been added to its global
fleet since Branson’s epiphany with Al Gore—quite possibly more than that.
And the atmospheric consequences are entirely predictable. In the years after
his climate pledge, Virgin airlines’ greenhouse gas emissions soared by
approximately 40 percent. Virgin Australia’s emissions jumped by 81 percent
between 2006–2007 and 2012–2013, while Virgin America’s emissions shot up
by 177 percent between 2008 and 2012. (The only bright spot in Branson’s
emissions record was a dip at Virgin Atlantic between 2007 and 2010—but that
likely was less the result of visionary climate policy than the global economic
downturn and the massive volcanic eruption in Iceland, which hit airlines
indiscriminately.)36
Much of the sharp overall rise in Virgin’s emissions was due to the airlines’
rapid growth rate—but that wasn’t the only factor. A study by the International
Council on Clean Transportation on the relative fuel efficiency of fifteen U.S.
domestic airlines in 2010 found that Virgin America clocked in at ninth
place.37 This is quite a feat considering that, unlike its much older competitors,
the brand-new airline could have built the best fuel efficiency practices into its
operations from day one. Clearly Virgin chose not to.
And it’s not just airplanes. While he has been publicly waging his carbon
war, Branson unveiled Virgin Racing to compete in Formula One (he claimed
he had entered the sport only because he saw opportunities to make it greener
but quickly lost interest). He also invested heavily in Virgin Galactic, his own
personal dream of launching the first commercial flights into space, for a mere
$250,000 per passenger. Not only is leisure space travel a pointless waste of
(planet-warming) energy, it is also yet another money pit: according to Fortune,
by early 2013 Branson had spent “more than $200 million” on the vanity
project, with much more in the works. That would be more than he appears to
have spent on the search for a green fuel to power his planes.VI38

When asked about the status of his $3 billion climate pledge, Branson tends
to plead poor, pointing to the losses posted by his transportation businesses.39
But given the manic level of growth in these sectors, it’s an excuse that rings
hollow. Not only have his trains been doing quite well, but given the flurry of
new routes and new airlines, there was clearly no shortage of surplus money to
spend. It’s just that the Virgin Group decided to follow the basic imperative of
capital: grow or die.
It’s also worth remembering that Branson was very clear when he announced
the pledge that if his transportation divisions were not profitable enough to
meet the target, he would divert funds from other parts of the Virgin empire.
And here we run into another kind of problem: Branson’s corporate modus
operandi is somewhat nontraditional. He tends to pull in relatively modest
profits (or even losses) while spending a great deal of money (his own, his
partners’, and taxpayers’) building up flashy extensions of the Virgin brand.
Then, when a new company is established, he sells all or part of his stake for a
hefty sum, and a lucrative brand licensing deal. This money isn’t posted as
profits from those businesses, but it helps explain how Branson’s net worth rose
from an estimated $2.8 billion in 2006, the year he met with Gore, to an
estimated $5.1 billion in 2014. Musing on his passion for environmentalism to
John Vidal in The Observer, Branson said, “I find it interests me a lot more than
making a few more bucks; it’s much more satisfactory.” And yet a few more
bucks he has certainly made.40
Meanwhile, with the ten-year deadline fast approaching, it seems we are no
closer to a miracle fuel to power Branson’s planes, which are burning
significantly more carbon than when the pledge period began. But fear not,
because Branson has what he describes as his “fallback insurance policy.” So
how is that going?41

The Incredible Disappearing Earth Challenge
After the original hoopla over Branson’s $25 million Virgin Earth Challenge (or
Earth Prize, as it is more frequently called), the initiative seemed to go dormant
for a while. When journalists remembered to ask the Virgin chief about the
search for a miracle technology to suck large amounts of carbon from the air, he
seemed to subtly lower expectations, much as he has done with green fuels. And
he had always cautioned that there was a chance that no one would win the

prize. In November 2010, Branson revealed that Virgin had received something
on the order of 2,500 entries. Nick Fox, Branson’s spokesperson, explained that
many ideas had to be ruled out because they were too risky and seemingly safer
ones were not “developed enough to be commercialized right now.” In Branson’s
words, there was no “slam dunk winner yet.”42
Fox also mentioned that far more than $25 million was needed to determine
some ideas’ large-scale viability, something more on the order of $2.5 billion.43
Branson claims he hasn’t completely given up on awarding the prize at some
future point, saying, “We hope it’s only a matter of time before there’s a
winner.” He has, however, changed his role from straight-up patron to
something more akin to a celebrity judge on a reality TV show, giving his
blessing to the most promising ideas and helping them land high-level advice,
investment, and other opportunities flowing from their association with the
Virgin brand.44
This new incarnation of the Earth Challenge was unveiled (to significantly
less fanfare than the first time around) in November 2011, at an energy
conference in Calgary, Alberta. Appearing by video link, Branson announced
the eleven most promising entries. Four were machines that directly sucked
carbon out of the air (though none at anywhere near the scale needed); three
were companies using the biochar process, which turns carbon-sequestering
plant matter or manure into charcoal and then buries it in the soil and is
controversial on a mass scale; and among the miscellaneous ideas was a
surprisingly low-tech one involving revamping livestock grazing to boost the
carbon-sequestering potential of soil.45
According to Branson, none of these finalists was ready yet to win the $25
million prize but they were being showcased like beauty queens at the energy
conference so that “the best engineers, investors, opinion formers and policy
makers [would] work together on this challenge. Only then will the potential be
realised. I see Calgary as a great city to start in.”46
It was certainly a revealing choice. Calgary is the economic heart of Canada’s
tar sands boom. Oil from those dirty deposits has made the city one of the
richest metropolises in the world, but its ongoing prosperity is entirely
contingent on continuing to find customers for its product. And that depends
very much on getting controversial pipelines like Keystone XL constructed
through increasingly hostile territory, as well as on dissuading foreign
governments from passing laws that would penalize Alberta’s particularly highcarbon fuel.

Enter Alan Knight, Richard Branson’s sustainability advisor and the man he
put in charge of the Earth Challenge. Knight took great pride in being Branson’s
go-to green guy, but their relationship was far from exclusive. Shell and Statoil
(two of the biggest players in the tar sands) were among the other clients in
Knight’s consultancy. So too was, in his words, “Calgary City and the Alberta
oil sands industry,” specifically the Oil Sands Leadership Initiative (OSLI), an
industry trade group comprised of ConocoPhillips, Nexen, Shell, Statoil, Suncor
Energy, and Total. Knight boasted of being given “private access to their
meetings,” and explained that he advised his clients in the Alberta oil patch on
how to allay mounting concerns about the enormous ecological costs of an
extraction process that is three to four times more greenhouse gas intensive than
conventional crude.47
His suggestion? Adopt a “narrative” about how their “awesome” technology
can be used not just to extract dirty oil but to solve the environmental problems
of tomorrow. And, he says, the choice of Calgary to host the next phase of
Branson’s Earth Challenge was “no coincidence”; indeed it appeared to be a way
for him to serve the interests of some of his biggest clients all at once—the tar
sands giants as well as Richard Branson. In an interview, Knight explained that
“you’ve got a lot of very good engineers and you’ve got a lot of very highly
financed companies who should be looking at this technology.”48
But what exactly would they be looking at this technology to do? Not simply
to suck out the carbon that they are putting into the air, but also, it turns out, to
add even more carbon. Because in Calgary, the Virgin Earth Challenge was
“reeingineered,” to use Knight’s word. While previously the goal had been to
find technology capable of removing large amounts of carbon and safely storing
it, Knight started referring to the prize as “an initiative to develop technology to
recycle CO2 direct from the air into commercially viable products.”49
It made a certain amount of sense: removing carbon out of the air has long
been technically possible. The problems have always been finding a means of
removal that was not prohibitively costly, as well as storage and scale. In a
market economy that means finding customers interested in buying a whole lot
of captured carbon. Which is where the decision to pitch the eleven most
promising entries in Calgary started to gel. Since the mid-2000s, the oil industry
has been increasing its use of a method known as Enhanced Oil Recovery
(EOR)—a set of techniques that mostly use high-pressure gas or steam
injections to squeeze more oil out of existing fields. Most commonly, wells are
injected with CO2 and research shows that this use of CO2 could cause the U.S.

proven oil reserves to double or even, with “next-generation” technologies,
quadruple. But there is a problem (other than the obvious planet-cooking one):
according to Tracy Evans, former president of the Texas oil and gas company
Denbury Resources, “The single largest deterrent to expanding production from
EOR today is the lack of large volumes of reliable and affordable CO2.”50
With this in mind, several of Branson’s group of eleven finalists have pitched
themselves as the start-ups best positioned to supply the oil industry with the
steady stream of carbon dioxide it needs to keep the oil flowing. Ned David,
president of Kilimanjaro Energy, one of Branson’s finalists, claimed that
machines like his have the potential to release huge volumes of oil once
assumed untappable, similar to what fracking did for natural gas. It could be, he
said, “a money gusher.” He told Fortune, “The prize is nearly 100 billion barrels
of U.S. oil if you can economically capture CO2 from air. That’s $10 trillion of
oil.”51
David Keith, who has been studying geoengineering for twenty-five years,
and who is the inventor of another one of the carbon-capture machines to make
Branson’s list, was slightly more circumspect. He explained that if carbon that
was removed from the air were used to extract oil, “you’re making hydrocarbon
fuel with a very low life-cycle [of] carbon emissions.” Maybe not so low, because
according to a study from the U.S. Department of Energy’s National Energy
Technology Laboratory, EOR techniques are estimated to be almost three times
as greenhouse-gas intensive as conventional extraction. And the oil is still going
to be burned, thereby contributing to climate change. While more research is
needed on the overall carbon footprint of EOR, one striking modeling study
examined a similar proposal that would use CO2 captured not from the air but
directly from coal plants. It found that the emissions benefit of sequestering
CO2 would be more than canceled out by all that extra oil: on a system-wide
basis, the process could still end up releasing about four times as much CO2 as it
would save.52
Moreover, much of this is oil that is currently considered unrecoverable—
i.e., not even counted in current proven reserves, which as we know already
represents five times more than we can safely burn. Any technology that can
quadruple proven reserves in the U.S. alone is a climate menace, not a climate
solution. As David Hawkins of the Natural Resources Defense Council puts it,
air capture has “morphed very rapidly from a technology whose purpose is to
remove CO2 to a technology whose purpose is to produce CO2.”53 And Richard

Branson has gone from promising to help get us off oil to championing
technologies aimed at extracting and burning much more of it. Some prize.

A Regulatory Avoidance Strategy?
There was something else worth noting about Branson’s decision to allow his
Earth Challenge to cobrand with the Alberta oil sector. The Calgary event took
place at a moment when the San Francisco–based Forest Ethics had been
upping the pressure on large corporations to boycott oil derived from the
Alberta tar sands because of its high-carbon footprint. A fierce debate was also
unfolding over whether new European fuel standards would effectively ban the
sale of tar sands oil in Europe. And as early as 2008, the NRDC had sent open
letters to fifteen U.S. and Canadian airlines asking them “to adopt their own
corporate ‘Low Carbon Fuel Standard’ and to publicly oppose the expansion” of
fuel from the tar sands and other unconventional sources, and to avoid these
fuels in their own fleets. The group made a special appeal to Branson, citing his
leadership in “combating global warming and developing alternative fuels.”54
It seemed like a fair enough demand: the Virgin chief had enjoyed enormous
publicity for his very public climate-change promises. None of them had yielded
much, but surely, while he was waiting for an algae-based jet fuel to materialize
or for someone to win the Earth Prize, Branson could make the relatively minor
concession of refusing to power his rapidly expanding fleet of airplanes with one
of the most carbon-intensive fuels on the market.
Branson did not make that commitment. Alan Knight publicly stated, “I do
not believe supporting a boycott is fair” and claimed that it was “impossible for
an airline to boycott fuel made from oil sands”—a position contradicted by
many experts.VII55 But Branson went further than refusing to participate in the
boycott. By bringing the Earth Challenge to Calgary, Branson in effect did for
the tar sands what his grand (but largely ephemeral) climate gestures have been
doing for Virgin all these years: dangled the prospect of a miracle technological
fix for carbon pollution just over the horizon in order to buy time to continue
escalating emissions, free of meddlesome regulation. Indeed it can be argued—
and some do—that Branson’s planet-savior persona is an elaborate attempt to
avoid the kind of tough regulatory action that was on the horizon in the U.K.
and Europe precisely when he had his high-profile green conversion.

After all, 2006 was a pivotal year for the climate change debate. Public
concern was rising dramatically, particularly in the U.K. where the movement’s
radical, grassroots flank was dominated by young activists who were determined
to stop the expansion of the fossil fuel economy in its tracks. Much as they
oppose fracking today, these activists used daring direct action to oppose new
airports, as well as the highly controversial proposed new runway at Heathrow,
which the airport claims would increase its number of flights by more than 50
percent.56
At the same time, the U.K. government was considering a broad climate
change bill that would have impacted the airline sector, and Gordon Brown,
Britain’s chancellor at the time, had attempted to discourage flying with a
marginal increase of the air passenger duty. In addition, the EU was entertaining
a proposal to lift the airline industry’s exemption from paying a Value Added
Tax and introduce an additional tax on aviation fuel. All these measures taken
together posed a significant threat to the profit margins of Branson’s chosen
industry.57
Branson often talks a good game about supporting government regulation
(saying he favors a global carbon tax, for instance), but he consistently opposes
serious climate regulations when they are actually on the table. He has, for
instance, been a hyperbolic, even bullying advocate of British airport expansion,
including that new runway at Heathrow. He is so hungry for the expansion, in
fact, that he has claimed, at various points, that its absence “will turn us into a
third world country,” that “global corporations will turn their back on London
in favour of better connected cities,” and that “Heathrow will become a symbol
of British decline.”)VIII58
This wasn’t the only time Branson’s claims to be committed to waging war
on carbon came into conflict with his hard-nosed business instincts. He came
out against the proposed climate tax in Australia and blasted a plan for a global
tax on airlines, claiming it “would tax the industry out of existence.”IX59
It’s this pattern that convinced Mike Childs of Friends of the Earth U.K. that
Branson’s reinvention as a guilt-ridden planet wrecker volunteering to use his
carbon profits to solve the climate crisis was little more than a cynical ploy. “It
comes across as a charitable act,” Childs warned of the $3 billion pledge, “but I
think he is also trying to take some of the heat out of aviation as a political
issue. If you are running a transport company, you must have realized by now
that climate change is going to be a massive issue for you.”60

Was he right? Well, one immediate impact of Branson’s pledge was that, all
of a sudden, you could feel good about flying again—after all, the profits from
that ticket to Barbados were going into Branson’s grand plan to discover a
miracle green fuel. It was an even more effective conscience cleaner than
carbon offsets (though Virgin sold those, too). As for punitive regulations and
taxes, who would want to get in the way of an airline whose proceeds were going
to such a good cause? And this was always Branson’s argument: let him grow,
unencumbered by regulation, and he will use that growth to finance our
collective green transition. “If you hold industry back, we will not, as a nation,
have the resources to come up with the new clean-energy solutions we need,”
Branson argued. “Business is the key to solving the financial and environmental
crisis.”61
So the skeptics might be right: Branson’s various climate adventures may
indeed prove to have all been a spectacle, a Virgin production, with everyone’s
favorite bearded billionaire playing the part of planetary savior to build his
brand, land on late night TV, fend off regulators, and feel good about doing bad.
It is certainly noteworthy that the show has been significantly less voluble ever
since the Conservative-led government of David Cameron came to power in the
U.K. and made it clear that Branson and his ilk faced no serious threat of topdown climate regulations.
But even if the constantly moving goalposts in Branson’s climate initiatives
merit that kind of cynicism, there is also a more charitable interpretation of
what has gone wrong. This interpretation would grant Branson his obvious love
of nature (whether it’s watching the tropical birds on his private island or
ballooning over the Himalayas). And it would credit him with genuinely trying
to figure out ways to reconcile running carbon-intensive businesses with a
profound personal desire to help slow species extinction and avert climate
chaos. It would acknowledge, too, that between the pledge, the prize, and the
Carbon War Room, Branson has thought up some rather creative mechanisms
to try to channel profits generated from warming the planet into projects that
could help keep it cool.
But if we do grant Branson these good intentions, then the fact that all of
these projects have failed to yield results is all the more relevant. Branson set
out to harness the profit motive to solve the climate crisis—but the temptation
to profit from practices worsening the crisis proved too great to resist. Again and
again, the demands of building a successful empire trumped the climate
imperative—whether that meant lobbying against needed regulation, or putting

more planes in the air, or pitching oil companies on using his pet miracle
technologies to extract more oil.
The idea that capitalism and only capitalism can save the world from a crisis
created by capitalism is no longer an abstract theory; it’s a hypothesis that has
been tested and retested in the real world. We are now able to set theory aside
and take a hard look at the results: at the celebrities and media conglomerates
that were supposed to model chic green lifestyles who have long since moved on
to the next fad; at the green products that were shunted to the back of the
supermarket shelves at the first signs of recession; at the venture capitalists who
were supposed to bankroll a parade of innovation but have come up far short; at
the fraud-infested, boom-and-bust carbon market that has failed miserably to
lower emissions; at the natural gas sector that was supposed to be our bridge to
renewables but ended up devouring much of their market instead. And most of
all, at the parade of billionaires who were going to invent a new form of
enlightened capitalism but decided that, on second thought, the old one was
just too profitable to surrender.
We’ve tried it Branson’s way. (And Buffett’s, Bloomberg’s, Gates’s, and
Pickens’s way.) The soaring emissions speak for themselves. There will, no
doubt, be more billionaire saviors who make splashy entrances, with more
schemes to rebrand capitalism. The trouble is, we simply don’t have another
decade to lose pinning our hopes on these sideshows. There is plenty of room to
make a profit in a zero-carbon economy; but the profit motive is not going to be
the midwife for that great transformation.
This is important because Branson was onto something with his pledge. It
makes perfect sense to make the profits and proceeds from the businesses that
are most responsible for exacerbating the climate crisis help pay for the
transition to a safer, greener future. Branson’s original idea—to spend 100
percent of the proceeds from his trains and airlines on figuring out a way to get
off fossil fuels—was, at least in theory, exactly the kind of thing that needs to
take place on a grand scale. The problem is that under current business models,
once the shareholders have taken a slice, once the executives have given
themselves yet another raise, once Richard Branson has launched yet another
world-domination project and purchased another private island, there doesn’t
seem to be much left over to fulfill the promise.
Similarly, Alan Knight was onto something when he told his tar sands clients
that they should use their technological prowess to invent the low-carbon and
renewable energy sources of the future. As he said, “The potential narrative is

perfect.”62 The hitch, of course, is that, so long as this vision is left to the
enlightened self-interest of oil and airline executives, it will remain just that: a
narrative—or rather, a fairy tale. Meanwhile, the industry will use its
technology and resources to develop ever more ingenious and profitable new
ways to extract fossil fuels from the deepest recesses of the earth, even as it
fiercely defends its public subsidies and resists the kind of minor increases to its
tax and royalty rates that would allow governments to fund green transitions
without its help.
In this regard, Virgin is particularly brazen. The National Union of Rail,
Maritime and Transport Workers estimates that Virgin Trains has received
more than £3 billion (the equivalent of $5 billion) in subsidies since British
railways were privatized in the late 1990s—significantly more than Branson
pledged to the green fund. As recently as 2010, Branson and the Virgin Group
received £18 million in dividends from Virgin Trains. Branson insists that the
characterization of him as a freeloader is “garbage,” pointing to sharp increases
in the number of passengers on Virgin trains and writing, “far from receiving
subsidies, we now pay more than £100m a year to the taxpayer.” But paying
taxes is part of doing business. So when Branson pays into the Green Fund,
whose money is it really—his own or the taxpayers’? And if a substantial portion
of it originally belonged to taxpayers, wouldn’t it have been a better
arrangement never to have sold off the rails in the first place?63
If that were the case, the British people—with the climate crisis in mind—
might have long ago decided to reinvest rail profits back into improving their
public transit system, rather than allowing trains to become outdated and fares
to skyrocket while shareholders of private rail companies like Branson’s
pocketed hundreds of millions in returns from their taxpayer-subsidized
operations. And rather than gambling on the invention of a miracle fuel, they
might have decided to make it a top political priority to shift the entire system
over to electric trains, with that power coming from renewable energy, rather
than have the system partially powered by diesel, as it is now. No wonder 66
percent of British residents tell pollsters they support renationalizing the railway
companies.64
Richard Branson got at least one thing right. He showed us the kind of bold
model that has a chance of working in the tight time frame left: the profits from
our dirtiest industries must be diverted into the grand and hopeful project of
cleaning up their mess. But if there is one thing Branson has demonstrated, it is
that it won’t happen on a voluntary basis or on the honor system. It will have to

be legislated—using the kinds of tough regulations, higher taxes, and steeper
royalty rates these sectors have resisted all along.
Of course there is still a chance that one of Branson’s techno-schemes could pan
out. He might yet stumble across a zero-carbon jet fuel, or a magic machine for
safely and cheaply removing carbon from the skies. Time, however, is not on
our side. David Keith, inventor of one of those carbon-sucking machines, in
which Bill Gates is a key investor, estimates that the technology is still decades
away from being taken to scale. “There’s no way you can do a useful amount of
carbon dioxide removal in less than a third of a century or maybe half a
century,” he says.65 As always with matters related to climate change, we have
to keep one eye on the ticking clock—and what that clock tells us is that if we
are to have a solid chance of avoiding catastrophic warming, we will need to be
burning strictly minimal amounts of fossil fuels a half century from now. If we
spend the precious years between now and then dramatically expanding our
emissions (as Branson is doing with his airlines, and as Knight’s clients are doing
in the tar sands), then we are literally betting the habitability of the planet on
the faint hope of a miracle cure.
And yet Branson (a notorious risk addict with a penchant for crash-landing
hot air balloons) is far from the only one willing to stake our collective future on
this kind of high-stakes gamble. Indeed the reason his various far-fetched
schemes have been taken as seriously as they have over the years is that he,
alongside Bill Gates with his near mystical quest for energy “miracles,” taps into
what may be our culture’s most intoxicating narrative: the belief that
technology is going to save us from the effects of our actions. Post–market crash
and amidst ever more sinister levels of inequality, most of us have come to
realize that the oligarchs who were minted by the era of deregulation and mass
privatization are not, in fact, going to use their vast wealth to save the world on
our behalf. Yet our faith in techno wizardry persists, embedded inside the
superhero narrative that at the very last minute our best and brightest are going
to save us from disaster.
This is the great promise of geoengineering and it remains our culture’s most
powerful form of magical thinking.

I. The Grantham Foundation for the Protection of the Environment has funded a broad range of large
environmental groups, ranging from The Nature Conservancy to Greenpeace, the Environmental Defense

Fund to 350.org.
II. It should be noted that though Steyer has separated out his personal funds from Farallon, he remains a
limited partner and has also promoted the use of natural gas, helping to fund the EDF research that went
into its pro-fracking study and enthusiastically endorsing natural gas in The Wall Street Journal.
III. Those policies have been criticized for favoring big developers over vulnerable communities and for
using a green veneer to push through mega real estate development projects with dubious environmental
benefits, as Hunter College urban affairs professor Tom Angotti and others have written. Communities
heavily impacted by Hurricane Sandy, meanwhile, have claimed that Bloomberg’s post-disaster rebuilding
plans were made with only token input from them.
IV. Aided by investments like these, the ethanol boom was responsible for 20–40 percent of the spike in
agricultural commodity prices in 2007–2009, according to a survey by the National Academy of Sciences.
V. Puerile humor of this sort is a recurring theme in Branson’s PR machine (the company once painted
“Mine’s Bigger than Yours” on the side of a new Airbus A340-600; boasted of its business-class seats that
“size does matter”; and even flew a blimp over London emblazoned with the slogan “BA [British Airways]
Can’t Get It Up!!”).
VI. To quote one scathing assessment of the project by sociologist Salvatore Babones, “If two words can
capture the extraordinary redistribution of wealth from workers to the wealthy over the past forty years, the
flagrant shamelessness of contemporary conspicuous consumption, the privatization of what used to be
public privileges and the wanton destruction of our atmosphere that is rapidly leading toward the
extinction of nearly all non-human life on earth, all covered in a hypocritical pretense of pious
environmental virtue . . . those two words are Virgin Galactic.”
VII. Including sustainability consultant Brendan May, founder of the Robertsbridge Group. “Of course
you can segregate fuel according to its source,” May writes. “If there’s a will, there’s a way. . . . At present,
there’s just no will.”
VIII. In 2012, he went so far as to offer to invest roughly $8 billion in an expansion of Virgin Atlantic’s
operations at Heathrow if the government would approve the new runway—a prospect that once again
raises questions about Branson’s claims to be too broke to keep up with his $3 billion climate pledge.
IX. Branson is apparently no great fan of paying taxes generally, as his byzantine network of offshore
holding companies in the Channel Islands and British Virgin Islands attests. Indeed he spent a night in jail
and received a hefty fine after getting caught in an illegal cross-border tax avoidance scam when running
his first company in 1971. “I was a criminal,” Branson writes of his jailhouse revelation in his
autobiography.

8

DIMMING THE SUN
The Solution to Pollution Is . . . Pollution?
“Geoengineering holds forth the promise of addressing global warming concerns for just a
few billion dollars a year.”
—Newt Gingrich, former speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives, 20081

“Our science is a drop, our ignorance a sea.”
—William James, 18952

It’s March 2011 and I have just arrived at a three-day retreat about
geoengineering in the Buckinghamshire countryside, about an hour and a half
northwest of London. The meeting has been convened by the Royal Society,
Britain’s legendary academy of science, which has counted among its fellows
Isaac Newton, Charles Darwin, and Stephen Hawking.
In recent years, the society has become the most prominent scientific
organization to argue that, given the lack of progress on emission reduction, the
time has come for governments to prepare a technological Plan B. In a report
published in 2009, it called upon the British government to devote significant
resources to researching which geoengineering methods might prove most
effective. Two years later it declared that planetary-scale engineering
interventions that would block a portion of the sun’s rays “may be the only
option for reducing global temperatures quickly in the event of a climate
emergency.”3
The retreat in Buckinghamshire has a relatively narrow focus: How should
research into geoengineering, as well as eventual deployment, be governed?
What rules should researchers follow? What bodies, if any, will regulate these

experiments? National governments? The United Nations? What constitutes
“good governance” of geoengineering? To answer these questions and others,
the society has teamed up with two cosponsors for the retreat: the World
Academy of Sciences based in Italy, which focuses on promoting scientific
opportunities in the developing world, and the Environmental Defense Fund,
which has described geoengineering as a “bridging tool” (much as it has
described natural gas).4 That makes this conference both the most international
gathering about geoengineering to date, and the first time a major green group
has publicly offered its blessing to the exploration of radical interventions into
the earth’s climate system as a response to global warming.
The venue for this futuristic discussion is an immaculately restored sixty-tworoom redbrick Georgian mansion called Chicheley Hall, once a set in a BBC
production of Pride and Prejudice, and the Royal Society’s newly acquired retreat
center. The effect is wildly anachronistic: the estate’s sprawling bright green
lawns, framed by elaborately sculpted hedges, seem to cry out for women in
corseted silk gowns and parasols discussing their suitors—not disheveled
scientists discussing a parasol for the planet. And yet geoengineering has always
had a distinctly retro quality, not quite steampunk, but it definitely harkens
back to more confident times, when taking control over the weather seemed
like the next exciting frontier of scientific innovation—not a last-ditch attempt
to save ourselves from incineration.
After dinner, consumed under towering oil paintings of plump-faced men in
silver wigs, the delegates are invited to the wood-paneled library. There, about
thirty scientists, lawyers, environmentalists, and policy wonks gather for the
opening “technical briefing” on the different geoengineering schemes under
consideration. A Royal Society scientist takes us through a slide show that
includes “fertilizing” oceans with iron to pull carbon out of the atmosphere;
covering deserts with vast white sheets in order to reflect sunlight back to space;
and building fleets of machines like the ones competing for Richard Branson’s
Earth Challenge that would suck carbon out of the air.
The scientist explains that there are too many such schemes to evaluate in
depth, and each presents its own particular governing challenge. So for the next
three days, we will zero in on the geoengineering methods the scientists here
consider most plausible and promising. These involve various means of injecting
particles into the atmosphere in order to reflect more sunlight back to space,
thereby reducing the amount of heat that reaches the earth. In geoengineering
lingo, this is known as Solar Radiation Management (SRM)—since these

methods would be attempting to literally “manage” the amount of sunlight that
reaches earth.
There are various possible sun-dimming approaches. The most gleefully sci-fi
is space mirrors, which is quickly dismissed out of hand. Another is “cloud
brightening”: spraying seawater into the sky (whether from fleets of boats or
from towers on shore) to create more cloud cover or to make clouds more
reflective and longer lasting. The most frequently discussed option involves
spraying sulfate aerosols into the stratosphere, whether via specially retrofitted
airplanes or a very long hose suspended by helium balloons (some have even
suggested using cannons).
The choice to focus exclusively on SRM is somewhat arbitrary given that
ocean fertilization experiments have been conducted on several occasions,
including a heavily reported “rogue” test off the coast of British Columbia in
2012. But SRM is attracting the lion’s share of serious scientific interest: sun
blocking has been the subject of over one hundred peer-reviewed papers, and
several high-level research teams are poised to run open-air field trials, which
would test the mechanics of these schemes using ships, planes, and very long
hoses. If rules and guidelines aren’t developed soon (including, as some are
suggesting, banning field tests outright), we could end up with a research Wild
West.5
Spraying sulfate into the stratosphere is often referred to as “the Pinatubo
Option,” after the 1991 eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines. Most
volcanic eruptions send ash and gases into the lower atmosphere, where sulfuric
acid droplets are formed that simply fall down to earth. (That was the case, for
instance, with the 2010 Icelandic volcano that grounded many European
flights.) But certain, much rarer eruptions—Mount Pinatubo among them—
send high volumes of sulfur dioxide all the way up to the stratosphere.
When that happens, the sulfuric acid droplets don’t fall back down: they
remain in the stratosphere, and within weeks can circulate to surround the
entire planet. The droplets act like tiny, light-scattering mirrors, preventing the
full heat of the sun from reaching the planet’s surface. When these larger
volcanic eruptions occur in the tropics, the aerosols stay suspended in the
stratosphere for roughly one to two years, and the global cooling effects can last
even longer.
That’s what happened after Pinatubo. The year after the eruption, global
temperatures dropped by half a degree Celsius, and as Oliver Morton noted in
Nature, “Had there not been a simultaneous El Niño, 1992 would have been 0.7

degrees cooler, worldwide, than 1991.”6 That figure is notable because we have
warmed the earth by roughly the same amount thus far with our greenhouse gas
emissions. Which is why some scientists have become convinced that if they
could just find a way to do artificially what those large eruptions do naturally,
then they could force down the temperature of the earth to counteract global
warming.
The scientist leading the briefing starts with the pros of this approach. He
observes that the technology to pull this off already exists, though it needs to be
tested; it’s relatively cheap; and, if it worked, the cooling effects would kick in
pretty quickly. The cons are that, depending on which sun-blocking method is
used and how intensively, a permanent haze could appear over the earth,
potentially making clear blue skies a thing of the past.7 The haze could prevent
astronomers from seeing the stars and planets clearly and weaker sunlight could
reduce the capacity of solar power generators to produce energy (irony alert).
But the biggest problem with the Pinatubo Option is that it does nothing to
change the underlying cause of climate change, the buildup of heat-trapping
gases, and instead treats only the most obvious symptom—warmer temperatures.
That might help control something like glacial melt, but would do nothing
about the increased atmospheric carbon that the ocean continues to soak up,
causing rapid acidification that is already taking a heavy toll on hard-shelled
marine life from coral to oysters, and may have cascading impacts through the
entire aquatic food chain. On the other hand, we hear, there could be some
advantages to allowing atmospheric carbon dioxide levels to increase while
keeping temperatures artificially cool, since plants like carbon dioxide (so long
as it’s not accompanied by scorching heat and drought) and they might well do
better in what would essentially become an artificial global greenhouse.
Oh, and another con: once you start spraying material into the stratosphere
to block the sun, it would basically be impossible to stop because if you did, all
the warming that you had artificially suppressed by putting up that virtual
sunshade would hit the planet’s surface in one single tidal wave of heat, with no
time for gradual adaptation. Think of the wicked witches of fairy tales, staying
young by drinking ill-gotten magical elixirs, only to decay and wither all at once
when the supply is abruptly cut off.
One solution to this “termination problem,” as our British guide politely
describes it, would be to suck a whole lot of carbon out of the atmosphere while
the shade was still up so that when the particles dissipate and the sun beams
down full bore, there is less heat-trapping gas in the atmosphere to augment the

warming. Which would be fine except for the fact that we don’t actually know
how to do that on anything close to the required scale (as Richard Branson has
discovered).
Listening to all this, a grim picture emerges. Nothing on earth would be
outside the reach of humanity’s fallible machines, or even fully outside at all.
We would have a roof, not a sky—a milky, geoengineered ceiling gazing down
on a dying, acidified sea.
And it gets worse, because our guide has saved the biggest con for last. A
slide comes up showing a map of the world, with regions color-coded based on
projections showing how severely their rainfall will be affected by injecting
sulfur dioxide into the stratosphere. Precipitation in Europe and North America
appears minimally changed, but Africa’s equatorial region is lit up red, an
indication of serious drought. And though the borders are hazy, parts of Asia
appear to be in trouble as well because the drop in land temperature caused by a
weaker sun could also weaken the summer monsoons, the main source of rainfall
in these regions.
Up to this point, the audience has been quietly listening, but this news seems
to wake up the room. One participant interrupts the presentation: “Let’s put
aside the science and talk about the ethics,” he says, clearly upset. “I come from
Africa and I don’t like what I’m seeing with precipitation.”I Indeed, one of the
society’s own reports on geoengineering acknowledges that Solar Radiation
Management “could conceivably lead to climate changes that are worse than
the ‘no SRM’ option.”8
The African delegate shakes his head. “I don’t know how many of us will
sleep well tonight.”

Warming Up to “Horrifying”
Schemes for deliberately intervening in the climate system to counteract the
effects of global warming have been around for half a century at least. In fact,
when the President’s Science Advisory Committee issued a report warning
Lyndon B. Johnson about climate change in 1965, the authors made no
mention of cutting emissions. The only potential solutions considered were
technological schemes like modifying clouds and littering oceans with reflective
particles.9

And well before it was seen as a potential weapon against global warming,
weather modification was simply seen as a weapon. During the Cold War, U.S.
physicists imagined weakening the nation’s enemies by stealthily manipulating
rainfall patterns, whether by causing droughts or by generating targeted storms
that would turn a critical supply route into a flooded mess, as was attempted
during the Vietnam War.10
So it’s little wonder that mainstream climate scientists have, until quite
recently, shied away from even discussing geoengineering. In addition to the Dr.
Strangelove baggage, there was a widespread fear of creating a climate moral
hazard. Just as bankers take greater risks when they know governments will bail
them out, the fear was that the mere suggestion of an emergency techno-fix—
however dubious and distant—would feed the dangerous but prevalent belief
that we can keep ramping up our emissions for another couple of decades.
More out of despair than conviction, the geoengineering taboo has been
gradually eroding over the past decade. A significant turning point came in
2006 when Paul Crutzen, who won the Nobel Prize in chemistry for his
breakthrough research on the deterioration of the ozone layer, wrote an essay
arguing that the time had come to consider injecting sulfur into the stratosphere
as an emergency escape route from severe global warming. “If sizeable reductions
in greenhouse gas emissions will not happen and temperatures rise rapidly, then
climatic engineering . . . is the only option available to rapidly reduce
temperature rises and counteract other climatic effects,” he wrote.11
Crutzen created some space for preliminary research to take place, but
geoengineering’s real breakthrough came after the Copenhagen summit flopped
in 2009, the same year that climate legislation tanked in the U.S. Senate.
Soaring levels of hope had been pinned on both processes and when neither
panned out, would-be planet hackers came out of their labs, positioning even
the most seemingly outlandish ideas as the only realistic options left—especially
with a world economic crisis making costly energy transformations seem
politically untenable.
The Pinatubo Option has become a media favorite thanks in large part to the
work of Nathan Myhrvold, the excitable former Microsoft chief technology
officer who now runs Intellectual Ventures, a company that specializes in
eclectic high-tech inventions and is often described as a vehicle for patent
trolling.12 Myhrvold is a made-for-TV character—a child prodigy turned
physicist turned tech star, as well as an avid dinosaur hunter and wildlife

photographer. Not to mention a formally trained amateur cook who spent
millions researching and cowriting a six-volume bible on molecular gastronomy.
In 2009, Myhrvold and his team unveiled details for a contraption they
called the “StratoShield,” which would use helium balloons to suspend a sulfur
dioxide–spraying tube thirty kilometers into the sky. And he wasted no time
pitching it as a substitute for government action: just two days after the
Copenhagen summit concluded, Myhrvold was on CNN boasting that his
device—which he said could deliver a “Mount Pinatubo on demand”—had the
power to “negate global warming as we have it today.”13
Two months earlier, Steven D. Levitt and Stephen J. Dubner’s global
bestseller SuperFreakonomics had come out, devoting an entire awestruck
chapter to Myhrvold’s hose to the sky. And whereas most scientists engaged in
this research are careful to present sun blocking as a worst-case scenario—a Plan
B to be employed only if Plan A (emission cuts) proves insufficient—Levitt and
Dubner declared that the Pinatubo Option was straight-up preferable to getting
off fossil fuels. “For anyone who loves cheap and simple solutions, things don’t
get much better.”14
Most of those calling for more geoengineering research do so with
significantly less glee. In September 2010, the New America Foundation and
Slate magazine held a one-day forum in Washington, D.C., titled
“Geoengineering: The Horrifying Idea Whose Time Has Come?”15 That one
sentence pretty much sums up the tone of grim resignation that has
characterized the steady stream of conferences and government reports that
have inched geoengineering into the political mainstream.
This gathering at Chicheley Hall is another milestone in this gradual process
of normalization. Rather than debate whether or not to engage in
geoengineering research—as most previous gatherings have done—this
conference seems to take some kind of geoengineering activity as a given (or
else why would it need to be “governed”). Adding to the sense not just of
inevitability but general banality, the organizers have even given this process a
clunky acronym: SRMGI, the Solar Radiation Management Governance
Initiative.
Geoengineering debate generally takes place within a remarkably small and
incestuous world, with the same group of scientists, inventors, and funders
promoting each other’s work and making the rounds to virtually every relevant
discussion of the topic. (Science journalist Eli Kintisch, who wrote one of the
first books on geoengineering, calls them the “Geoclique.”) And many of the

members of that clique are in attendance here. There is David Keith, the wiry,
frenetic physicist, then at the University of Calgary (now at Harvard), whose
academic work has a major focus on SRM, and whose carbon-sucking machine
—blessed by both Richard Branson and Bill Gates—stands to make him rather
rich should the idea of a techno fix for global warming take off. This kind of
vested interest is a recurring theme: many of the most aggressive advocates of
geoengineering research are associated with planet-hacking start-ups, or hold
patents on various methods. This, says Colby College science historian James
Fleming, gives them “skin in the game” since these scientists stand “to make an
incredible amount of money if their technique goes forward.”16
Here too is Ken Caldeira, a prominent atmospheric scientist from the
Carnegie Institution for Science, and one of the first serious climate scientists to
run computer models examining the impact of deliberately dimming the sun. In
addition to his academic work, Caldeira has an ongoing relationship with
Nathan Myhrvold’s Intellectual Ventures as a “Senior Inventor.”17 Another
player present is Phil Rasch, a climate scientist at the Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory in Washington state, who has been preparing to launch
perhaps the first cloud-brightening field experiment.
Bill Gates isn’t here, but he provided much of the cash for the gathering,
allocated through a fund administered by Keith and Caldeira. Gates has given
the scientists at least $4.6 million specifically for climate-related research that
wasn’t getting funding elsewhere. Most of it has gone to geoengineering themes,
with Keith, Caldeira, and Rasch all receiving large shares. Gates is also an
investor in Keith’s carbon capture company, as well as in Intellectual Ventures,
where his name appears on several geoengineering patents (alongside
Caldeira’s), while Nathan Myhrvold serves as vice chairman at TerraPower,
Gates’s nuclear energy start-up. Branson’s Carbon War Room has sent a
delegate and is supporting this work in various ways.18 If that all sounds
confusing and uncomfortably clubby, especially for so global and high stakes a
venture, well, that’s the Geoclique for you.
Because governing geoengineering, as opposed to just testing it, is the focus
of this retreat, the usual club has been temporarily expanded to include several
climate scientists from Africa and Asia, as well as legal ethicists, experts in
international treaties and conventions, and staffers from several green NGOs,
including Greenpeace and WWF-UK (Greenpeace does not support
geoengineering, but WWF-UK has come out in cautious support of “research
into geoengineering approaches in order to find out what is possible”).19

The organizers have also invited a couple of outspoken critics. Alan Robock,
a famously gruff white-bearded climatologist from Rutgers University, is here.
When I last saw him in action, he was presenting a slide show titled “20
Reasons Why Geoengineering May Be a Bad Idea,” ranging from “Whitening of
the sky” (#7) to “Rapid warming if deployment stops” (#10). Most provocative
is Australian climate expert Clive Hamilton, who has wondered aloud whether
“the geoengineers [are] modern-day Phaetons, who dare to regulate the sun, and
who must be struck down by Zeus before they destroy the earth?”20
In the end, the conference manages to agree on nothing of substance—not
even the need for small-scale field trials to take place. But throwing this group
of people together in a country mansion for three days does make for some
interesting intellectual fireworks.

What Could Possibly Go Wrong?
After a night’s sleep, the guests at Chicheley Hall are ready to dive into the
debates. In a sleek slate-and-glass lecture hall located in the old coach house,
the organizers separate the group into breakout sessions. Everyone receives a
sheet of paper with a triangle on it, and on each point is a different word:
“Promote,” “Prohibit,” “Regulate.” The instructions say “Mark where you feel
your current perspective best fits on the triangle.” Do you want further research
into sun-shielding banned? Aggressively promoted? Promoted with some
measure of regulation?
I spend the morning eavesdropping on the different breakouts and before
long a pattern emerges. The scientists already engaged in geoengineering
research tend to categorize their positions somewhere between “regulate” and
“promote,” while most everyone else leans toward “prohibit” and “regulate.”
Several of the participants express a desire to promote more research, but only
to establish that geoengineering isn’t a viable option that we can bank on to
save the day. “We particularly need to know if it’s not going to work,” one
environmentalist pleads to the scientists in his session. “Right now we’re
struggling in the dark.”
But in one breakout group, things have gone off the rails. A participant flatly
refuses to place his views on the triangle and instead, helps himself to a large
piece of poster paper. On it he writes three questions in blue marker:

• Is the human that gave us the climate crisis capable of properly/safely
regulating SRM?
• In considering SRM regulation, are we not in danger of perpetuating the
view that the earth can be manipulated in our interests?
• Don’t we have to engage with these questions before we place ourselves
in the triangle?
When the groups come back together to discuss their triangular mind maps,
these questions are never acknowledged, let alone answered. They just hang on
the wall of the lecture hall as a sort of silent rebuke. It’s too bad, because the
Royal Society, with its long and storied history of helping to both launch the
Scientific Revolution and the age of fossil fuels, offers a unique vantage point
from which to ponder these matters.
The Royal Society was founded in 1660 as an homage to Francis Bacon. Not
only is the organization’s motto—Nullius in verba—“take nothing on
authority”—inspired by Bacon but, somewhat bizarrely, much of the society’s
basic structure was modeled on the fictional scientific society portrayed in
Bacon’s proto-sci-fi/utopian novel New Atlantis, published in 1627. The
institution was at the forefront of Britain’s colonial project, sponsoring voyages
by Captain James Cook (including the one in which he laid claim to New
Zealand), and for over forty years the Royal Society was led by one of Cook’s
fellow explorers, the wealthy botanist Joseph Banks, described by a British
colonial official as “the staunchest imperialist of the day.”21 During his tenure,
the society counted among its fellows James Watt, the steam engine pioneer,
and his business partner, Matthew Boulton—the two men most responsible for
launching the age of coal.
As the questions hanging on the wall imply, these are the tools and the logic
that created the crisis geoengineering is attempting to solve—not just the coalburning factories and colonial steam ships, but Bacon’s twisted vision of the
Earth as a prone woman and Watt’s triumphalism at having found her “weak
side.” Given this, does it really make sense to behave as if, with big enough
brains and powerful enough computers, humans can master and control the
climate crisis just as humans have been imagining they could master the natural
world since the dawn of industrialization—digging, damming, drilling, dyking. Is
it really as simple as adding a new tool to our nature-taming arsenal: dimming?
This is the strange paradox of geoengineering. Yes, it is exponentially more
ambitious and more dangerous than any engineering project humans have ever

attempted before. But it is also very familiar, nearly a cliché, as if the past five
hundred years of human history have been leading us, ineluctably, to precisely
this place. Unlike cutting our emissions in line with the scientific consensus,
succumbing to the logic of geoengineering does not require any change from us;
it just requires that we keep doing what we have done for centuries, only much
more so.
Wandering the perfectly manicured gardens at Chicheley Hall—through the
trees sculpted into lollipops, through the hedges chiseled into daggers—I realize
that what scares me most is not the prospect of living on a “designer planet,” to
use a phrase I heard at an earlier geoengineering conference. My fear is that the
real-world results will be nothing like this garden, or even like anything we saw
in that technical briefing, but rather something far, far worse. If we respond to a
global crisis caused by our pollution with more pollution—by trying to fix the
crud in our lower atmosphere by pumping a different kind of crud into the
stratosphere—then geoengineering might do something far more dangerous
than tame the last vestiges of “wild” nature. It may cause the earth to go wild in
ways we cannot imagine, making geoengineering not the final engineering
frontier, another triumph to commemorate on the walls of the Royal Society,
but the last tragic act in this centuries-long fairy tale of control.
A great many of our most brilliant scientists have taken the lessons of past
engineering failures to heart, including the failure of foresight represented by
climate change itself, which is one of the primary reasons there is still so much
resistance to geoengineering among biologists and climate scientists. To quote
Sallie Chisholm, a world-renowned expert on marine microbes at MIT,
“Proponents of research on geoengineering simply keep ignoring the fact that
the biosphere is a player (not just a responder) in whatever we do, and its
trajectory cannot be predicted. It is a living breathing collection of organisms
(mostly microorganisms) that are evolving every second—a ‘self-organizing,
complex, adaptive system’ (the strict term). These types of systems have
emergent properties that simply cannot be predicted. We all know this! Yet
proponents of geoengineering research leave that out of the discussion.”22
Indeed in my time spent among the would-be geoengineers, I have been
repeatedly struck by how the hard-won lessons about humility before nature that
have reshaped modern science, particularly the fields of chaos and complexity
theory, do not appear to have penetrated this particular bubble. On the
contrary, the Geoclique is crammed with overconfident men prone to
complimenting each other on their fearsome brainpower. At one end you have

Bill Gates, the movement’s sugar daddy, who once remarked that it was difficult
for him to decide which was more important, his work on computer software or
inoculations, because they both rank “right up there with the printing press and
fire.” At the other end is Russ George, the U.S. entrepreneur who has been
labeled a “rogue geoengineer” for dumping some one hundred tons of iron
sulphate off the coast of British Columbia in 2012. “I am the champion of this
on the planet,” he declared after the experiment was exposed, the only one with
the guts to “step forward to save the oceans.” In the middle are scientists like
David Keith, who often comes off as deeply conflicted about “opening up
Pandora’s Box”—but once said of the threat of weakened monsoons from Solar
Radiation Management that “hydrological stresses” can be managed “a little bit
by irrigation.”23
The ancients called this hubris; the great American philosopher, farmer and
poet Wendell Berry calls it “arrogant ignorance,” adding, “We identify arrogant
ignorance by its willingness to work on too big a scale, and thus to put too much
at risk.”II24
It doesn’t provide much reassurance that just two weeks before we all
gathered at Chicheley Hall, three nuclear reactors at Fukushima melted down in
the wake of a powerful tsunami. The story was still leading the news the entire
time we met. And yet the extent to which the would-be geoengineers
acknowledged the disaster was only to worry that opponents of nuclear energy
would seize upon the crisis to block new reactors. They never entertained the
idea that Fukushima might serve as a cautionary tale for their own high-risk
engineering ambitions.
Which brings us back to that slide showing parts of Africa lit up red that
caused such a stir on opening night: is it possible that geoengineering, far from a
quick emergency fix, could make the impacts of climate change even worse for a
great many people? And if so, who is most at risk and who gets to decide to take
those risks?

Like Climate Change, Volcanoes Do Discriminate
Boosters of Solar Radiation Management tend to speak obliquely about the
“distributional consequences” of injecting sulfur dioxide into the stratosphere,
and of the “spatial heterogeneity” of the impacts. Petra Tschakert, a geographer
at Penn State University, calls this jargon “a beautiful way of saying that some

countries are going to get screwed.”25 But which countries? And screwed
precisely how?
Having reliable answers to those key questions would seem like a prerequisite
for considering deployment of such a world-altering technology. But it’s not at
all clear that obtaining those answers is even possible. Keith and Myhrvold can
test whether a hose or an airplane is a better way to get sulfur dioxide into the
stratosphere. Others can spray saltwater from boats or towers and see if it
brightens clouds. But you’d have to deploy these methods on a scale large
enough to impact the global climate system to be certain about how, for
instance, spraying sulfur in the Arctic or the tropics will impact rainfall in the
Sahara or southern India. But that wouldn’t be a test of geoengineering; it would
actually be conducting geoengineering.26
Nor could the necessary answers be found from a brief geoengineering stint—
pumping sulfur for, say, one year. Because of the huge variations in global
weather patterns from one year to the next (some monsoon seasons are naturally
weaker than others, for instance), as well as the havoc already being wreaked by
global warming, it would be impossible to connect a particular storm or drought
to an act of geoengineering. Sulfur injections would need to be maintained long
enough for a clear pattern to be isolated from both natural fluctuations and the
growing impacts of greenhouse gases. That likely means keeping the project
running for a decade or more.III27
As Martin Bunzl, a Rutgers philosopher and climate change expert, points
out, these facts alone present an enormous, perhaps insurmountable ethical
problem for geoengineering. In medicine, he writes, “You can test a vaccine on
one person, putting that person at risk, without putting everyone else at risk.”
But with geoengineering, “You can’t build a scale model of the atmosphere or
tent off part of the atmosphere. As such you are stuck going directly from a
model to full scale planetary-wide implementation.” In short, you could not
conduct meaningful tests of these technologies without enlisting billions of
people as guinea pigs—for years. Which is why science historian James Fleming
calls geoengineering schemes “untested and untestable, and dangerous beyond
belief.”28
Computer models can help, to be sure. That’s how we get our best estimates
of how earth systems will be impacted by the emission of greenhouse gases. And
it’s straightforward enough to add a different kind of emission—sulfur in the
stratosphere—to those models and see how the results change. Several research
teams have done just that, with some very disturbing results. Alan Robock, for

instance, has run different SRM scenarios through supercomputers. The findings
of a 2008 paper he coauthored in the Journal of Geophysical Research were blunt:
sulfur dioxide injections “would disrupt the Asian and African summer
monsoons, reducing precipitation to the food supply for billions of people.”
Those monsoons provide precious freshwater to an enormous share of the
world’s population. India alone receives between 70 and 90 percent of its total
annual rainfall during its June through September monsoon season.29
Robock and his colleagues aren’t the only ones coming up with these
alarming projections. Several research teams have produced models that show
significant losses of rainfall as a result of SRM and other sunlight-reflecting
geoengineering methods. One 2012 study shows a 20 percent reduction in
rainfall in some areas of the Amazon after a particularly extreme use of SRM.
When another team modeled spraying sulfur from points in the Northern
Hemisphere for a 2013 study, the results projected a staggering 60–100 percent
drop in a key measure of plant productivity in the African countries of the Sahel
(Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Sudan)—that means,
potentially, a complete crop collapse in some areas.30
This is not some minor side effect or “unintended consequence.” If only some
of these projections were to come true, that would transform a process being
billed as an emergency escape from catastrophic climate change into a mass
killer in its own right.
One might think all of this alarming research would be enough to put a
serious damper on the upbeat chatter surrounding the Pinatubo Option. The
problem is that—though computer models have proven remarkably accurate at
predicting the broad patterns of climate change—they are not infallible. As we
have seen from the failure to anticipate the severity of summer sea ice loss in the
Arctic as well as the rate of global sea level rise in recent decades, computer
models have tended to underestimate certain risks, and overstate others.31 Most
significantly, climate models are at their weakest when predicting specific
regional impacts—how much more southern Somalia will warm than the
central United States, say, or the precise extent to which drought will impact
crop production in India or Australia. This uncertainty has allowed some wouldbe geoengineers to scoff at findings that make SRM look like a potential
humanitarian disaster, insisting that regional climate models are inherently
unreliable, while simultaneously pointing to other models that show more
reassuring results. And if the controversy were just a matter of dueling computer
models, perhaps we could call it a draw. But that is not the case.

History as Teacher—and Warning
Without being able to rely on either models or field tests, only one tool remains
to help forecast the risks of sun blocking, and it is distinctly low-tech. That tool
is history, specifically the historical record of weather patterns following major
volcanic eruptions. The relevance of history is something all sides of the debate
appear to agree on. Ken Caldeira has described the 1991 eruption of Mount
Pinatubo “as a natural test of some of the concepts underlying solar radiation
management” since it sent so much sulfur dioxide into the stratosphere. And
David Keith assured me, “It’s pretty clear that just putting a lot of sulfur in the
stratosphere isn’t terrible. After all, volcanoes do it.” Likewise, Lowell Wood,
Myhrvold’s partner in the invention of the StratoShield, has argued that
because his hose-to-the-sky would attempt to imitate a natural volcano, there is
“a proof of harmlessness.”32
Levitt and Dubner have stressed the relevance of historical precedent most
forcefully, writing in SuperFreakonomics that not only did the earth cool after
Pinatubo, but “forests around the world grew more vigorously because trees
prefer their sunlight a bit diffused. And all that sulfur dioxide in the stratosphere
created some of the prettiest sunsets that people had ever seen.” They do not,
however, appear to believe that history offers any cautionary lessons: aside from
a reference to the “relatively small” number of deaths in the immediate
aftermath of the eruption due to storms and mud slides, they make no mention
in the book of any negative impact from Pinatubo.33
Critics of sun shielding also draw on history to bolster their arguments, and
when they look back, they see much more than pretty sunsets and “proof of
harmlessness.” In fact, a great deal of compelling research shows a connection
between large volcanic eruptions and precisely the kinds of droughts some
computer models are projecting for SRM. Take the 1991 eruption of Mount
Pinatubo itself. When it erupted, large swaths of Africa were already suffering
from drought due to natural fluctuations. But after the eruption, the situation
grew much worse. In the following year, there was a 20 percent reduction in
precipitation in southern Africa and a 10–15 percent reduction in precipitation
in South Asia. The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
described the drought as “the most severe in the last century”; an estimated 120
million people were affected. The Los Angeles Times reported crop losses of 50–
90 percent, and half the population of Zimbabwe required food aid.34

At the time, few linked these disastrous events to the Pinatubo eruption
since isolating such climate signals takes time. But more recent research looking
at rainfall and streamflow patterns from 1950 to 2004 has concluded that only
the sulfur dioxide that Pinatubo sent into the stratosphere can account for the
severity of the drop in rainfall that followed the eruption. Aiguo Dai, an expert
in global drought at the State University of New York, Albany, stresses that
though the drought had additional causes, “Pinatubo contributed significantly
to the drying.” A 2007 paper cowritten by Dai and Kevin Trenberth, head of
the Climate Analysis Section at the Colorado-based National Center for
Atmospheric Research, concluded “that the Pinatubo eruption played an
important role in the record decline in land precipitation and discharge, and the
associated drought conditions in 1992.”35
If Pinatubo was the only large eruption to have been followed by severe and
life-endangering drought, that might not be enough to draw clear conclusions.
But it fits neatly into a larger pattern. Alan Robock, a leading expert on the
effect of volcanoes on climate, points in particular to two other eruptions—
Iceland’s Laki in 1783 and Alaska’s Mount Katmai in 1912. Both were
sufficiently powerful to send a high volume of sulfur dioxide into the
stratosphere and, like Pinatubo, it turns out that both were followed by a series
of terrible, or badly worsening regional droughts.
Reliable records of rainfall go back only roughly one hundred years, but as
Robock informed me, “There’s one thing that’s been measured for 1,500 years,
and that’s the flow of the Nile River. And if you look back at the flow of the
Nile River in 1784 or 1785”—the two years following Laki’s eruption in Iceland
—“it was much weaker than normal.” The usual floods that could be counted on
to carry water and precious fertilizing nutrients into farmers’ fields barely took
place, the devastating consequences of which were recounted in the eighteenthcentury travel memoirs of French historian Constantin-François Volney. “Soon
after the end of November, the famine carried off, at Cairo, nearly as many as
the plague; the streets, which before were full of beggars, now afforded not a
single one: all had perished or deserted the city.” Volney estimated that in two
years, one sixth of the population in Egypt either died or fled the country.36
Scholars have noted that in the years immediately following the eruption,
drought and famine gripped Japan and India, claiming millions of lives,
although there is much debate and uncertainty surrounding Laki’s contribution.
In Western and Central Europe, meanwhile, a brutally cold winter led to
flooding and high mortality rates. Expert estimates of the global death toll from

the eruption and the resulting extreme weather range widely, from over oneand-a-half million to as many as six million people. At a time when world
population was less than one billion, those are stunningly high numbers, making
Laki quite possibly the deadliest volcano in recorded history.37
Robock found something similar when he delved into the aftermath of the
1912 Katmai eruption in Alaska. Once again, his team looked at the historical
record of the flow of the Nile and discovered that the year after Katmai saw “the
lowest flow for the twentieth century.” Robock and his colleagues also “had
found a significant weakening of the Indian monsoon in response to the 1912
Katmai volcanic eruption in Alaska, which resulted from the decreased
temperature gradient between Asia and the Indian Ocean.” But it was in Africa
where the impact of the great eruption took the heaviest human toll. In Nigeria,
sorghum, millet, and rice crops withered in the fields while speculators hoarded
what grains survived. The result was a massive famine in 1913–1914 that took
the lives of at least 125,000 in western Africa alone.38
These are not the only examples of deadly droughts seemingly triggered by
large volcanic eruptions. Robock has looked at how such eruptions have
impacted “the water supply for Sahel and northern Africa” over the past two
thousand years. “You get the same story from every [eruption] you look at,” he
said, adding, “there haven’t been that many big eruptions but they all tell you
the same stories. . . . The global average precipitation went down. In fact, if you
look at global average precipitation for the last fifty years, the three years with
the lowest global precipitation were after the three largest volcanic eruptions.
Agung in 1963, El Chichón in 1982, and Pinatubo in 1991.” The connections
are so clear, Robock and two coauthors argued in one paper, that the next time
there is a large “high-latitude volcanic eruption,” policymakers should start
preparing food aid immediately, “allowing society time to plan for and remediate
the consequences.”39
So how, given all this readily available evidence, could geoengineering
boosters invoke the historical record for “proof of harmlessness”? The truth is
the mirror opposite: of all the extreme events the planet periodically lobs our
way—from earthquakes and tsunamis to hurricanes and floods—powerful
volcanic eruptions may well be the most threatening to human life. Because the
people in the immediate path of an eruption are not the only ones at risk; the
lives of billions of others scattered throughout the globe can be destroyed by
lack of food and water in the drier years to come. No naturally occurring disaster
short of an asteroid has such global reach.

This grim track record makes the cheerful talk of a Pinatubo Option
distinctly bizarre, if not outright sinister—especially because what is being
contemplated is simulating the cooling effects of an eruption like Pinatubo not
once but year after year for decades, which could obviously magnify the
significant risks that have been documented in the aftermath of one-off
eruptions.
The risks can be debated and contested, of course—and they are. The most
common response is that, yes, there could be negative impacts, but not as
negative as the impacts of climate change itself. David Keith goes further,
arguing that we have the power to effectively minimize the risks with
appropriate design; he proposes an SRM program that would slowly ramp up and
then down again, “in combination with cutting emissions and with a goal to
reduce—but not eliminate—the rate of temperature rise.” As he explains in his
2013 book, A Case for Climate Engineering, “Crop losses, heat stress and flooding
are the impacts of climate change that are likely to fall most harshly on the
world [sic] poorest. The moderate amounts of geoengineering contemplated in
this slow ramp scenario are likely to reduce each of these impacts over the next
half century, and so it will benefit the poor and politically disadvantaged who
are most vulnerable to rapid environmental change. This potential for reducing
climate risk is the reason I take geoengineering seriously.”40
But when climate models and the historical record tell such a similar story
about what could go wrong (and of course it wouldn’t be scientists but
politicians deciding how to use these technologies), there is ample cause for
focusing on the very real risks. Trenberth and Dai, authors of the study on
Pinatubo’s harrowing legacy, are blunt. “The central concern with
geoengineering fixes to global warming is that the cure could be worse than the
disease.” And they stress, “Creating a risk of widespread drought and reduced
freshwater resources for the world to cut down on global warming does not seem
like an appropriate fix.”41
It’s hard not to conclude that the willingness of many geoegineering boosters
to gloss over the extent of these risks, and in some cases, to ignore them
entirely, has something to do with who appears to be most vulnerable. After all,
if the historical record, backed by multiple models, indicated that injecting
sulfur into the stratosphere would cause widespread drought and famine in
North America and Germany, as opposed to the Sahel and India, is it likely that
this Plan B would be receiving such serious consideration?

It’s true that it might be technically possible to conduct geoengineering in a
way that distributed the risks more equitably. For instance, the same 2013 study
that found that the African Sahel could be devastated by SRM done in the
Northern Hemisphere—a common assumption about where the sulfur
injections would take place—found that the Sahel could actually see an increase
in rainfall if the injections happened in the Southern Hemisphere instead.
However, in this scenario, the United States and the Caribbean could see a 20
percent increase in hurricane frequency, and northeastern Brazil could see its
rainfall plummet. In other words, it might be possible to tailor some of these
technologies to help the most vulnerable people on the planet, and those who
contributed least to the creation of the climate crisis—but not without
endangering some of the wealthiest and most powerful regions. So we are left
with a question less about technology than about politics: does anyone actually
believe that geoengineering will be used to help Africa if that help could come
only by putting North America at greater risk of extreme weather?42
In contrast, it is all too easy to imagine scenarios wherein geoengineering
could be used in a desperate bid to, say, save corn crops in South Dakota, even if
it very likely meant sacrificing rainfall in South Sudan. And we can imagine it
because wealthy-country governments are already doing this, albeit more
passively, by allowing temperatures to increase to levels that are a danger to
hundreds of millions of people, mostly in the poorest parts of the world, rather
than introducing policies that interfere with short-term profits. This is why
African delegates at U.N. climate summits have begun using words like
“genocide” to describe the collective failure to lower emissions. And why Mary
Ann Lucille Sering, climate change secretary for the Philippines, told the 2013
summit in Warsaw, Poland, “I am beginning to feel like we are negotiating on
who is to live and who is to die.” Rob Nixon, an author and University of
Wisconsin English professor, has evocatively described the brutality of climate
change as a form of “slow violence”; geoengineering could well prove to be a
tool to significantly speed that up.43

Geoengineering as Shock Doctrine
All of this may still seem somewhat abstract but it’s critical to reckon with these
harrowing risks now. That’s because if geoengineering were ever deployed, it
would almost surely be in an atmosphere of collective panic with scarce time for

calm deliberation. Its defenders readily concede as much. Bill Gates describes
geoengineering as “just an insurance policy,” something to have “in the back
pocket in case things happen faster.” Nathan Myhrvold likens SRM to “having
fire sprinklers in a building”—you hope you won’t need it, “but you also need
something to fall back on in case the fire occurs anyway.”44
In a true emergency, who would be immune to this logic? Certainly not me.
Sure, the idea of spraying sulfur dioxide into the stratosphere like some kind of
cosmic umbrella seems crazy to me now. But if my city were so hot that people
were dropping dead in the thousands, and someone was peddling a quick and
dirty way to cool it off, wouldn’t I beg for that relief in the same way that I reach
for the air conditioner on a sweltering day, knowing full well that by turning it
on I am contributing to the very problem I am trying to escape?
This is how the shock doctrine works: in the desperation of a true crisis all
kinds of sensible opposition melts away and all manner of high-risk behaviors
seem temporarily acceptable. It is only outside of a crisis atmosphere that we can
rationally evaluate the future ethics and risks of deploying geoengineering
technologies should we find ourselves in a period of rapid change. And what
those risks tell us is that dimming the sun is nothing like installing a sprinkler
system—unless we are willing to accept that some of those sprinklers could very
well spray gasoline instead of water. Oh—and that, once turned on, we might
not be able to turn off the system without triggering an inferno that could burn
down the entire building. If someone sold you a sprinkler like that, you’d
definitely want a refund.
Perhaps we do need to find out all we possibly can about these technologies,
knowing that we will never know close to enough to deploy them responsibly.
But if we accept that logic, we also have to accept that small field tests often
turn into bigger ones. It may start with just checking the deployment hardware,
but how long before the planet hackers want to see if they can change the
temperature in just one remote, low-population location (something that will be
described, no doubt, as “the middle of nowhere”)—and then one a little less
remote?
The past teaches us that once serious field tests begin, deployment is rarely
far behind. Hiroshima and Nagasaki were bombed less than a month after
Trinity, the first successful nuclear test—despite the fact that many of the
scientists involved in the Manhattan Project thought they were building a
nuclear bomb that would be used only as a deterrent. And though slamming the
door on any kind of knowledge is always wrenching, it’s worth remembering

that we have collectively foregone certain kinds of research before, precisely
because we understand that the risks are too great. One hundred and sixty-eight
nations are party to a treaty banning the development of biological weapons.
The same taboos have been attached to research into eugenics because it can so
easily become a tool to marginalize and even eliminate whole groups of people.
Moreover the U.N. Environmental Modification Convention, which was
adopted by governments in the late 1970s, already bans the use of weather
modification as a weapon—a prohibition that today’s would-be geoengineers are
skirting by insisting that their aims are peaceful (even if their work could well
feel like an act of war to billions).

Monster Earth
Not all geoengineering advocates dismiss the grave dangers their work could
unleash. But many simply shrug that life is full of risks—and just as
geoengineering is attempting to fix a problem created by industrialization, some
future fix will undoubtedly solve the problems created by geoengineering.
One version of the “we’ll fix it later” argument that has gained a good deal of
traction comes from the French sociologist Bruno Latour. His argument is that
humanity has failed to learn the lessons of the prototypical cautionary story
about playing god: Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein. According to Latour, Shelley’s
real lesson is not, as is commonly understood, “don’t mess with mother nature.”
Rather it is, don’t run away from your technological mess-ups, as young Dr.
Frankenstein did when he abandoned the monster to which he had given life.
Instead, Latour says we must stick around and continue to care for our
“monsters” like the deities that we have become. “The real goal must be to have
the same type of patience and commitment to our creations as God the Creator,
Himself,” he writes, concluding, “From now on, we should stop flagellating
ourselves and take up explicitly and seriously what we have been doing all along
at an ever-increasing scale.” (British environmentalist Mark Lynas makes a
similar, defiantly hubristic argument in calling on us to become “The God
Species” in his book of the same name.)45
Latour’s entreaty to “love your monsters” has become a rallying cry in certain
green circles, particularly among those most determined to find climate
solutions that adhere to market logic. And the idea that our task is to become
more responsible Dr. Frankensteins, ones who don’t flee our creations like

deadbeat dads, is unquestionably appealing. But it’s a terribly poor metaphor for
geoengineering. First, “the monster” we are being asked to love is not some
mutant creature of the laboratory but the earth itself. We did not create it; it
created—and sustains—us. The earth is not our prisoner, our patient, our
machine, or, indeed, our monster. It is our entire world. And the solution to
global warming is not to fix the world, it is to fix ourselves.
Because geoengineering will certainly monsterize the planet as nothing
experienced in human history. We very likely would not be dealing with a
single geoengineering effort but some noxious brew of mixed-up techno-fixes—
sulfur in space to cool the temperature, cloud seeding to fix the droughts it
causes, ocean fertilization in a desperate gambit to cope with acidification, and
carbon-sucking machines to help us get off the geo-junk once and for all.
This makes geoengineering the very antithesis of good medicine, whose goal
is to achieve a state of health and equilibrium that requires no further
intervention. These technologies, by contrast, respond to the lack of balance
our pollution has created by taking our ecosystems even further away from selfregulation. We would require machines to constantly pump pollution into the
stratosphere and would be unable to stop unless we invented other machines
that could suck existing pollution out of the lower atmosphere, then store and
monitor that waste indefinitely. If we sign on to this plan and call it
stewardship, we effectively give up on the prospect of ever being healthy again.
The earth—our life support system—would itself be put on life support, hooked
up to machines 24/7 to prevent it from going full-tilt monster on us.
And the risks are greater still because we might well be dealing with multiple
countries launching geoengineering efforts at once, creating unknown and
unknowable interactions. In other words, a Frankenstein world, in which we try
to solve one problem by making new ones, then pile techno-fixes onto those.
And almost no one seems to want to talk about what happens if our
geoengineering operations are interrupted for some reason—by war, terrorist
attack, mechanical failure, or extreme weather. Or what if, in the middle of
simulating the effects of a Mount Pinatubo–like eruption, a real Mount
Pinatubo erupts. Would we risk bringing on what David Keith has described as
“a worldwide Ice Age, a snowball earth,” just because we forgot, yet again, that
we are not actually in the driver’s seat?46
The dogged faith in technology’s capacity to allow us to leapfrog out of crisis
is born of earlier technological breakthroughs—splitting the atom or putting a
man on the moon. And some of the players pushing most aggressively for a

techno-fix for climate change were directly involved in those earlier
technological triumphs—like Lowell Wood, who helped develop advanced
nuclear weaponry, or Gates and Myrhvold, who revolutionized computing. But
as longtime sustainability expert Ed Ayres wrote in God’s Last Offer, the “if we
can put a man on the moon” boosterism “glosses over the reality that building
rockets and building livable communities are two fundamentally different
endeavors: the former required uncanny narrow focus; the latter must engage a
holistic view. Building a livable world isn’t rocket science; it’s far more complex
than that.”47

Have We Really Tried Plan A?
On day two of the geoengineering retreat at Chicheley Hall, a spirited debate
breaks out about whether the U.N. has any role to play in governing
geoengineering experiments. The scientists anxious to get their field tests off the
ground are quickest to dismiss the institution, fearing an unwieldy process that
would tie their hands. The participants from NGOs are not quite ready to throw
out the institution that has been the primary forum for climate governance,
flawed as it is.
Just when things are getting particularly heated, there is a commotion outside
the glass doors of the lecture hall.
A fleet of brand-new luxury cars has pulled up outside and a retinue of people
—noticeably better dressed than the ones in the geoengineering session—pile
out, their polished wingtips and high heels crunching noisily on the gravel
pathways. One of our hosts from the Royal Society explains that for the rest of
the day, another retreat put on by the auto company Audi will also be holding
its sessions in the refurbished coach house. I peek outside and notice that
several signs bearing Audi’s Olympics-like logo have appeared along the
driveway.
For the rest of the afternoon, our tense discussions about the ethics of
blocking the sun are periodically interrupted by loud cheers coming from next
door. The reason for the cheering is, we are told, a corporate secret, but the
team from Audi is obviously very happy about something—next season’s
models, perhaps, or maybe sales figures.
The Royal Society regularly rents out Chicheley Hall for corporate retreats
and Downton Abbey–inspired weddings so the fact that these two meetings are

taking place cheek-by-jowl in a country mansion is, of course, pure coincidence.
Still, separated by nothing more than a thin sliding wall, it’s hard not to feel
that the angsty would-be geoengineers and the carefree German car sellers are
in conversation with each other—as if, more than anything, the reckless
experiments the people in our room are attempting to rationalize are really
about allowing the car people in the next room to keep their party going.
The mind has a habit of making connections out of random proximate
events, but in this case, it’s not entirely random. There is no doubt that some of
the people pushing geoengineering see these technologies not as emergency
bridges away from fossil fuels, but as a means to keep the fossil fuel frenzy going
for as long as possible. Nathan Myhrvold, for one, has even proposed using the
mountains of yellow sulfur that are produced as waste in the Alberta tar sands to
shield the sun, which would conveniently allow the oil majors to keep digging
and drilling indefinitely. “You could put one little pumping facility up there,
and with one corner of one of those sulfur mountains, you could solve the whole
global warming problem for the Northern Hemisphere.” And David Keith’s
start-up company Carbon Engineering has not only Bill Gates as an investor,
but also Murray Edwards, whose oil company Canadian Natural Resources is
one of the biggest players in the tar sands.48
Neither of these is an isolated case. Corporations that either dig up fossil
fuels or that, like car companies, are responsible for a disproportionate share of
their combustion, have a long track record of promoting geoengineering as a
response to climate change, one that they clearly see as preferable to stopping
their pollution. This goes as far back as 1992, when the National Academy of
Sciences copublished a controversial report titled Policy Implications of
Greenhouse Warming. To the consternation of many climate scientists, the
document included a series of geoengineering options, some of them rather
outlandish, from sending fifty thousand mirrors into earth’s orbit to putting
“billions of aluminized, hydrogen-filled balloons in the stratosphere to provide a
reflective screen.”49
Adding to the controversy was the fact that this chapter of the report was led
by Robert A. Frosch, then a vice president at General Motors. As he explained
at the time: “I don’t know why anybody should feel obligated to reduce carbon
dioxide if there are better ways to do it. When you start making deep cuts,
you’re talking about spending some real money and changing the entire
economy. I don’t understand why we’re so casual about tinkering with the whole

way people live on the Earth, but not tinkering a little further with the way we
influence the environment.”50
And notably, it was BP’s chief scientist, Steven Koonin, who convened one
of the first formal scientific gatherings on geoengineering back in 2008. The
gathering produced a report outlining a decade-long research project into
climate modification, with a particular focus on Solar Radiation Management.
(Koonin left BP to work for the Obama administration as the Department of
Energy’s under secretary for science.)51
It’s much the same story at several influential think tanks that are generously
funded with fossil fuel dollars. For instance, over a period of years, as it stoked
the flames of climate change denial, the American Enterprise Institute (AEI)
took millions of dollars in donations from ExxonMobil. It continues to be the
top recipient of money from conservative foundations eager to block climate
action, bringing in at least $86.7 million from those sources since 2003. And
yet, in 2008, the think tank launched a department called the Geoengineering
Project. The project has held several conferences, published multiple reports,
and sent experts to testify before congressional hearings—all with the consistent
message that geoengineering isn’t a Plan B should emission cuts fail, but rather a
Plan A. Lee Lane, who for several years was AEI’s main spokesperson on the
subject, explained in 2010, “For those of us who believe that climate change
might, at some point, pose a grave threat—and that emissions containment is
both costly and politically impractical—climate engineering is beginning to
look like the last, best hope.”52
This position is striking given the think tank’s well-documented history of
attacks on climate science and concerted efforts to trash virtually every serious
attempt to regulate emissions, including mild legislation favoring energyefficient light bulbs (big government interference in “how we wish to light up
our lives,” as one AEI researcher put it).53 Some at the think tank have signaled
their openness to a modest or revenue-neutral carbon tax in recent years, which
along with geoengineering is an increasingly prominent fetish among nonclimate-change-denying Republicans. Still, you would think that turning down
the sun for every person on earth is a more intrusive form of big government
than asking citizens to change their light bulbs. Indeed you would think that
pretty much any policy option would be less intrusive. But that is to miss the
point: for the fossil fuel companies and their paid champions, anything is
preferable to regulating ExxonMobil, including attempting to regulate the sun.

The rest of us tend to see things differently, which is why the fact that
geoengineering is being treated so seriously should underline the urgent need for
a real Plan A—one based on emission reduction, however economically radical
it must be. After all, if the danger of climate change is sufficiently grave and
imminent for governments to be considering science-fiction solutions, isn’t it
also grave and imminent enough for them to consider just plain science-based
solutions?
Science tells us we need to keep the vast majority of proven fossil fuel
reserves in the ground. It seems reasonable, then, that any government ready to
fund experiments into climate alteration should also be willing, at the very least,
to put a moratorium on new extreme energy development, while providing
sufficient funding for a rapid transition to renewable energy. As the Tyndall
Centre’s Kevin Anderson points out, “At the moment we’re digging out shale
gas and tar sands and lots of coal. We’re going to be digging under the Arctic.
We don’t need to concern ourselves too much with geoengineering for the
future, we just need to stop getting fossil fuels out of the ground today.”54
And how about some other solutions discussed in these pages—like taking far
larger shares of the profits from the rogue corporations most responsible for
waging war on the climate and using those resources to clean up their mess? Or
reversing energy privatizations to regain control over our grids? We have only
the briefest window in which this strategy is viable, before we need to get off
fossil fuels entirely, so surely it merits discussion.
The Indian author and activist Vandana Shiva, meanwhile, points out that
shifting to an agriculture model based on agro-ecological methods would not
only sequester large amounts of carbon, it would reduce emissions and increase
food security. And unlike geoengineering, “It’s not a fifty-year experiment. It’s
an assured, guaranteed path that has been shown to work.”55 Admittedly, such
responses break all the free market rules. Then again, so did bailing out the
banks and the auto companies. And they are still not close to as radical as
breaking the primordial link between temperature and atmospheric carbon—all
to meet our desire for planetary air-conditioning.
If we were staring down the barrel of an imminent and unavoidable climate
emergency, the kinds of monstrous calculations implicit in geoengineering—
sacrifice part of Latin America in order to save all of China, or save the
remaining glaciers and land ice to prevent catastrophic global sea level rise but
risk endangering India’s food source—might be unavoidable. But even if we
acquire enough information to make those kinds of calculations (and it’s hard to

imagine how we could), we notably are not at that point. We have options, ones
that would greatly decrease the chances of ever confronting those impossible
choices, choices that indeed deserve to be described as genocidal. To fail to
exercise those options—which is exactly what we are collectively doing—
knowing full well that eventually the failure could force government to
rationalize “risking” turning whole nations, even subcontinents, into sacrifice
zones, is a decision our children may judge as humanity’s single most immoral
act.

The Astronaut’s Eye View
There is a photograph from the day Richard Branson launched his $25 million
Virgin Earth Challenge that keeps popping into my head at the geoengineering
retreat. Branson, dressed in black, has a big grin on his face and he is gleefully
tossing a plastic model of Planet Earth into the air as if it were a beach ball. Al
Gore, looking unsure about whether this is a good idea, is standing by his side.56
This frozen moment strikes me as the perfect snapshot of the first incarnation
of the climate movement: a wealthy and powerful man with the whole world
literally in his hands, promising to save the fragile blue planet on our behalf.
This heroic feat will be accomplished, he has just announced, by harnessing the
power of human genius and the desire to get really, really rich.
Pretty much everything is wrong with that picture. The reinvention of a
major climate polluter into a climate savior based on little more than good PR.
The assumption that dangling enough money can solve any mess we create.
And the certainty that the solutions to climate change must come from above
rather than below.
But I’ve begun to think that there is another problem too—it has to do with
that pale blue sphere that Branson was tossing skyward. For more than forty
years, the view of the Earth from space has been the unofficial logo of the
environmental movement—featured on countless T-shirts, pins, and bumper
stickers. It is the thing that we are supposed to protect at U.N. climate
conferences, and that we are called upon to “save” every Earth Day, as if it were
an endangered species, or a starving child far away, or a pet in need of our
ministrations. And that idea may be just as dangerous as the Baconian fantasy of
the earth as a machine for us to master, since it still leaves us (literally) on top.

When we marvel at that blue marble in all its delicacy and frailty, and
resolve to save the planet, we cast ourselves in a very specific role. That role is
of a parent, the parent of the earth. But the opposite is the case. It is we humans
who are fragile and vulnerable and the earth that is hearty and powerful, and
holds us in its hands. In pragmatic terms, our challenge is less to save the earth
from ourselves and more to save ourselves from an earth that, if pushed too far,
has ample power to rock, burn, and shake us off completely. That knowledge
should inform all we do—especially the decision about whether to gamble on
geoengineering.
It wasn’t supposed to be this way, of course. In the late 1960s, when NASA
shared the first photographs of the whole earth from space, there was a great
deal of rhapsodizing about how the image would spark a leap in human
consciousness. When we were finally able to see our world as an interconnected
and holistic entity we at last would understand that this lonely planet is our
only home and that it is up to us to be its responsible caretakers.IV This was
“Spaceship Earth” and the great hope was that being able to see it would cause
everyone to grasp what British economist and author Barbara Ward meant when
she said in 1966, “This space voyage is totally precarious. We depend upon a
little envelope of soil and a rather larger envelope of atmosphere for life itself.
And both can be contaminated and destroyed.”57
So how did we get from that humility before life’s precariousness to Branson’s
game of planet beach ball? One person who saw it all coming was the irascible
American novelist Kurt Vonnegut: “Earth is such a pretty blue and pink and
white pearl in the pictures NASA sent me,” he wrote in The New York Times
Magazine in 1969. “It looks so clean. You can’t see all the hungry, angry
earthlings down there—and the smoke and the sewage and trash and
sophisticated weaponry.”58
Before those pictures, environmentalism had mostly been intensely local—an
earthy thing, not an Earth thing. It was Henry David Thoreau musing on the
rows of white bush beans in the soil by Walden Pond. It was Edward Abbey
ranging through the red rocks of southern Utah. It was Rachel Carson down in
the dirt with DDT-contaminated worms. It was vividly descriptive prose,
naturalist sketches, and, eventually, documentary photography and film seeking
to awaken and inspire love for specific creatures and places—and, by extension,
for creatures and places like them all over the world.

When environmentalism went into outer space, adopting the perspective of
the omniscient outsider, things did start getting, as Vonnegut warned, awfully
blurry. Because if you are perpetually looking down at the earth from above,
rather than up from its roots and soil, it begins to make a certain kind of sense
to shuffle around pollution sources and pollution sinks as if they were pieces on
a planet-sized chessboard: a tropical forest to drink up the emissions from a
European factory; lower-carbon-fracked gas to replace coal; great fields of corn
to displace petroleum; and perhaps in the not too distant future, iron in the
oceans and sulfur dioxide in the stratosphere to counter carbon dioxide in the
lower atmosphere.
And all the while, just as Vonnegut warned, any acknowledgment of the
people way down below the wispy clouds disappears—people with attachments
to particular pieces of land with very different ideas about what constitutes a
“solution.” This chronic forgetfulness is the thread that unites so many fateful
policy errors of recent years, from the decision to embrace fracked natural gas as
a bridge fuel (failing to notice there were people on those lands who were
willing to fight against the shattering of their territory and the poisoning of their
water) to cap-and-trade and carbon offsets (forgetting the people once again,
the ones forced to breathe the toxic air next to refineries that were being kept
open thanks to these backroom deals, as well as the ones locked out of their
traditional forests that were being converted into offsets).
We saw the same above-it-all perspective take its toll, tragically, when many
of these same players persuaded themselves that biofuels were the perfect lowcarbon alternative to oil and gas—only to discover what would have been
blindingly obvious if people had figured as prominently in their calculations as
carbon: that using prime land to grow fuel puts the squeeze on food, and
widespread hunger is the entirely predictable result. And we see the same
problems when policymakers ram through industrial-scale wind farms and
sprawling desert solar arrays without local participation or consent, only to
discover that people are living on those lands with their own inconvenient
opinions about how they should be used and who should benefit from their
development.
This lethal amensia is once again rearing its head in geoengineering
discussions like the one at Chicheley Hall. It is awfully reassuring to imagine
that a technological intervention could save Arctic ice from melting but, once
again, far too little attention is being paid to the billions of people living in

monsoon-fed parts of Asia and Africa who could well pay the price with their
suffering, even their lives.
In some cases, the effect of the astronaut’s eye view proves particularly
extreme. Their minds hovering out in orbit, there are those who begin to
imagine leaving the planet for good—saying, “Goodbye Earth!” to quote
Princeton physicist Gerard O’Neill, who, in the mid-1970s, started calling for
the creation of space colonies to overcome the earth’s resource limits.
Interestingly, one of O’Neill’s most devoted disciples was Stewart Brand, the
founder of the Whole Earth Catalog, who spent a good chunk of the 1970s
arguing that the U.S. government should build space colonies; today he is one
of the most vocal proponents of Big Tech fixes to climate change, whether
nuclear power or geoengineering.59
And he’s not the only prominent geoengineering booster nurturing the
ultimate escape fantasy. Lowell Wood, co-inventor of the hose-to-the-sky, is an
evangelical proponent of terraforming Mars: there is “a 50/50 chance that young
children now alive will walk on Martian meadows . . . will swim in Martian
lakes,” he told an Aspen audience in 2007, describing the technological
expertise for making this happen as “kid’s stuff.”60
And then there is Richard Branson, Mr. Retail Space himself. In September
2012, Branson told CBS This Morning that, “In my lifetime, I am determined to
be part of starting a population on Mars. I think it is absolutely realistic. It will
happen.” This plan, he said, includes “people inhabiting Mars . . . in sort of
giant domes.” In another interview, he revealed that he has put a striking
amount of thought into who should be invited to this outer space cocktail party:
“You’re going to want physicians, you’re going to want comedians, you’re going
to want fun people, beautiful people, ugly people, a good cross-section of what
happens on Earth on Mars. People have got to be able to get on together,
because it’s going to be quite confined.” Oh and one more person on the list: “It
may be a one-way trip. . . . So maybe I’ll wait till the last 10 years of my life, and
then maybe go, if my wife will let me,” Branson said. In explaining his rationale,
the Virgin head has invoked physicist Stephen Hawking, who “thinks it’s
absolutely essential for mankind to colonize other planets because one day,
something dreadful might happen to the Earth. And it would be very sad to see
years of evolution going to waste.”61
So said the man whose airlines have a carbon footprint the size of Honduras’
and who is pinning his hopes for planetary salvation not on emissions cuts, but
on a carbon-sucking machine that hasn’t been invented yet.62 Perhaps this is

mere coincidence, but it does seem noteworthy that so many key figures in the
geoengineering scene share a strong interest in a planetary exodus. For it is
surely a lot easier to accept the prospect of a recklessly high-risk Plan B when
you have, in your other back pocket, a Plan C.
The danger is not so much that these visions will be realized; geoengineering
the earth is a long shot, never mind terraforming Mars. Yet as Branson’s own
emissions illustrate so elegantly, these fantasies are already doing real damage in
the here and now. As environmental author Kenneth Brower writes, “The
notion that science will save us is the chimera that allows the present
generation to consume all the resources it wants, as if no generations will follow.
It is the sedative that allows civilization to march so steadfastly toward
environmental catastrophe. It forestalls the real solution, which will be in the
hard, nontechnical work of changing human behavior.” And worst of all, it tells
us that, “should the fix fail, we have someplace else to go.”63
We know this escape story all too well, from Noah’s Ark to the Rapture.
What we need are stories that tell us something very different: that this planet is
our only home, and that what goes around comes around (and what goes up,
stays up for a very long time, so we’d better be careful what we put there).
Indeed, if geoengineering has anything going for it, it is that it slots perfectly
into our most hackneyed cultural narrative, the one in which so many of us
have been indoctrinated by organized religion and the rest of us have absorbed
from pretty much every Hollywood action movie ever made. It’s the one that
tells us that, at the very last minute, some of us (the ones that matter) are going
to be saved. And since our secular religion is technology, it won’t be god that
saves us but Bill Gates and his gang of super-geniuses at Intellectual Ventures.
We hear versions of this narrative every time a commercial comes on about how
coal is on the verge of becoming “clean,” about how the carbon produced by the
tar sands will soon be sucked out of the air and buried deep underground, and
now, about how the mighty sun will be turned down as if it were nothing more
than a chandelier on a dimmer. And if one of the current batch of schemes
doesn’t work, the same story tells us that something else will surely arrive in the
nick of time. We are, after all, the super-species, the chosen ones, the God
Species. We will triumph in the end because triumphing is what we do.
But after so many of our most complex systems have failed, from BP’s
deepwater drilling to the derivatives market—with some of our biggest brains
failing to foresee these outcomes—there is some evidence that the power of this
particular narrative arc is beginning to weaken. The Brookings Institution

released a survey in 2012 that found that roughly seven in ten Americans think
that trying to turn down the sun will do more harm than good. Only three in
ten believe that “scientists would be able to find ways to alter the climate in a
way that limits problems” caused by warming. And in a paper published in
Nature Climate Change in early 2014, researchers analyzed data from interviews
and a large online survey conducted in Australia and New Zealand—with the
biggest sample size of any geoengineering public opinion study to date. Malcolm
Wright, the study’s lead author, explained, “The results show that the public has
strong negative views towards climate engineering. . . . It is a striking result and
a very clear pattern. Interventions such as putting mirrors in space or fine
particles into the stratosphere are not well received.” Perhaps most interesting
of all given the high-tech subject, older respondents were more amenable to
geoengineering than younger ones.64
And the best news is that the time of astronaut’s eye-view environmentalism
appears to be passing, with a new movement rising to take its place, one deeply
rooted in specific geographies but networked globally as never before. Having
witnessed the recent spate of big failures, this generation of activists is unwilling
to gamble with the precious and irreplaceable, certainly not based on the
reassuring words of overconfident engineers.
This is a movement of many movements, and though utterly undetectable
from space, it is beginning to shake the fossil fuel industry to its core.

I. The retreat took place under the Chatham House Rule, which allows those attending to report on
what was said in sessions, but not on who said what. (Any interviews conducted outside of the official
sessions are exempt from these rules.)
II. It’s particularly troubling that within the small group of scientists, engineers, and inventors who
dominate the geoengineering debate, there have been a disproportionate share of big public errors in the
past. Take, for instance, Lowell Wood, co-creator of Myhrvold’s StratoShield. Before becoming a
prominent proponent of the “Pinatubo Option,” Wood was best known for coming up with some of the
more fantastical elements of Ronald Reagan’s “Star Wars” missile defense program, widely discredited as
expensive and reckless.
III. That said, we would be wise to anticipate even small amounts of geoengineering unleashing a new
age of weather-related geopolitical recrimination, paranoia, and possibly retaliation, with every future
natural disaster being blamed—rightly or wrongly—on the people in faraway labs playing god.
IV. Ironically, the most reproduced of the earth-from-space photos was likely taken by Harrison Schmitt,
a card-carrying climate change denier, former U.S. senator and a regular speaker at Heartland conferences.
He was rather blasé about the experience: “You seen one Earth, you’ve seen them all,” he reportedly said.

PART THREE

STARTING ANYWAY
“The day capitalism is forced to tolerate non-capitalist societies in its midst and to
acknowledge limits in its quest for domination, the day it is forced to recognize that its
supply of raw material will not be endless, is the day when change will come. If there is any
hope for the world at all, it does not live in climate-change conference rooms or in cities
with tall buildings. It lives low down on the ground, with its arms around the people who go
to battle every day to protect their forests, their mountains and their rivers because they
know that the forests, the mountains and the rivers protect them.
“The first step towards reimagining a world gone terribly wrong would be to stop the
annihilation of those who have a different imagination—an imagination that is outside of
capitalism as well as communism. An imagination which has an altogether different
understanding of what constitutes happiness and fulfillment. To gain this philosophical
space, it is necessary to concede some physical space for the survival of those who may
look like the keepers of our past, but who may really be the guides to our future.”
—Arundhati Roy, 20101

“When I started the lawsuit against Chevron in 1993, I thought, ‘What we need to do to
fight this company and to get justice is we need to unite the Amazon.’ And that was a hard
challenge. That was a hard task ahead. And now, today, I dare to say that we must unite the
entire world. We have to unite the entire world to fight these companies, to fight these
challenges.”
—Luis Yanza, cofounder, Frente de Defensa de la Amazonía (Amazon Defense Front), 20102

9

BLOCKADIA
The New Climate Warriors
“Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty
shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent
environmental degradation.”
—The United Nations Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 19921

“An honest and scrupulous man in the oil business is so rare as to rank as a museum
piece.”
—U.S. Interior Secretary Harold Ickes, 19362

“Passport,” says the cop, tear gas canisters and grenades hanging off his
bulletproof vest like medals of honor. We hand over the passports, along with
press passes and other papers attesting that we are nothing more exciting than a
vanload of Canadian documentary filmmakers.
The riot cop takes the documents wordlessly, motioning to our translator to
get out of the car. He then whispers at length to a colleague whose eyes remain
fixed on the enormous biceps bulging from his own crossed arms. Another cop
joins the huddle, then another. The last one pulls out a phone and painstakingly
reads the names and numbers on each document to whoever is on the other
end, occasionally shooting a question to our translator. More uniformed men
mill nearby. I count eleven in total.
It’s getting dark, the dirt road on which we have been apprehended is a mess
and drops off sharply on one side. There are no streetlights.
I have the strong impression we are being deliberately screwed with—that
the whole point of this lengthy document check is to force us to drive this rough

road in the dark. But we all know the rules: look pleasant; don’t make eye
contact; don’t speak unless spoken to. Resist the impulse to take pictures of the
line of heavily armed cops standing in front of coils of barbed wire (happily it
turns out our camera guy was filming through his mesh hat). And Rule No. 1 on
encounters with arbitrary power: do not show how incredibly pissed off you are.
We wait. Half an hour. Forty minutes. Longer. The sun sets. Our van fills
with ravenous mosquitoes. We continue to smile pleasantly.
As far as checkpoints go, I’ve seen worse. In post-invasion Iraq, everyone had
to submit to full pat-downs in order to get in and out of any vaguely official
building. Once on the way in and out of Gaza, we were scanned eight different
ways and interrogated at length by both the Israeli Defense Forces and Hamas.
What’s strange about what is happening on this dirt road is that we are not in a
war zone, at least not officially. Nor is this a military regime, or an occupied
territory, or any other place you might expect to be held and interrogated at
length without cause. This is a public road in Greece, a democratic state
belonging to the European Union. Moreover this particular road is in Halkidiki,
a world-renowned tourist destination that attracts many thousands of visitors
every year, drawn to the peninsula’s stunning combination of sandy beaches,
turquoise waters, olive groves, and old-growth forests filled with four-hundredyear-old beech and oak trees and dotted with waterfalls.
So what’s up with all the riot police? The barbed wire? The surveillance
cameras strapped to tree branches?

Welcome to Blockadia
What’s up is that this area is no longer a Greek vacationland, though the
tourists still crowd the white-washed resorts and oceanfront tavernas, with their
blue-checked tablecloths and floors sticky with ouzo. This is an outpost of a
territory some have taken to calling “Blockadia.” Blockadia is not a specific
location on a map but rather a roving transnational conflict zone that is
cropping up with increasing frequency and intensity wherever extractive
projects are attempting to dig and drill, whether for open-pit mines, or gas
fracking, or tar sands oil pipelines.
What unites these increasingly interconnected pockets of resistance is the
sheer ambition of the mining and fossil fuel companies: the fact that in their
quest for high-priced commodities and higher-risk “unconventional” fuels, they

are pushing relentlessly into countless new territories, regardless of the impact
on the local ecology (in particular, local water systems), as well as the fact that
many of the industrial activities in question have neither been adequately tested
nor regulated, yet have already shown themselves to be extraordinarily accidentprone.
What unites Blockadia too is the fact the people at the forefront—packing
local council meetings, marching in capital cities, being hauled off in police
vans, even putting their bodies between the earth-movers and earth—do not
look much like your typical activist, nor do the people in one Blockadia site
resemble those in another. Rather, they each look like the places where they
live, and they look like everyone: the local shop owners, the university
professors, the high school students, the grandmothers. (In the quaint seaside
Greek village of Ierissos, with its red roofs and lively beach promenade, when an
anti-mining rally is called, the owners of the tavernas have to wait tables
themselves because their entire staffs are off at the demos.)
Resistance to high-risk extreme extraction is building a global, grassroots,
and broad-based network the likes of which the environmental movement has
rarely seen. And perhaps this phenomenon shouldn’t even be referred to as an
environmental movement at all, since it is primarily driven by a desire for a
deeper form of democracy, one that provides communities with real control over
those resources that are most critical to collective survival—the health of the
water, air, and soil. In the process, these place-based stands are stopping real
climate crimes in progress.
Seeing those successes, as well as the failures of top-down environmentalism,
many young people concerned about climate change are taking a pass on the
slick green groups and the big U.N. summits. Instead, they are flocking to the
barricades of Blockadia. This is more than a change in strategy; it’s a
fundamental change in perspective. The collective response to the climate crisis
is changing from something that primarily takes place in closed-door policy and
lobbying meetings into something alive and unpredictable and very much in the
streets (and mountains, and farmers’ fields, and forests).
Unlike so many of their predecessors, who’ve spent years imagining the
climate crisis through the astronaut’s eye view, these activists have dropped the
model globes and are getting lower-case earth under their nails once again. As
Scott Parkin, a climate organizer with the Rainforest Action Network, puts it:
“People are hungry for climate action that does more than asks you to send
emails to your climate-denying congressperson or update your Facebook status

with some clever message about fossil fuels. Now, a new antiestablishment
movement has broken with Washington’s embedded elites and has energized a
new generation to stand in front of the bulldozers and coal trucks.”3 And it has
taken the extractive industries, so accustomed to calling the shots, entirely by
surprise: suddenly, no major new project, no matter how seemingly routine, is a
done deal.
In the Skouries forest near Ierissos where our van was stopped, the catalyst
was a plan by the Canadian mining company Eldorado Gold to clear-cut a large
swath of old-growth forest and reengineer the local water system in order to
build a massive open-pit gold and copper mine, along with a processing plant,
and a large underground mine.4 We were pulled over in a part of the forest that
will be leveled to make way for a large dam and tailings pond, to be filled with
liquid waste from the mining operation. It was like visiting someone who had
just been given six months to live.
Many of the people who reside in the villages nearby, who depend on this
mountain for freshwater, are adamantly opposed to the mine. They fear for the
health of their children and livestock, and are convinced that such a large-scale,
toxic industrial operation has no place in a region highly dependent on tourism,
fishing, and farming. Locals have expressed their opposition through every
means they can think of. In a vacation community like this, that can make for
odd juxtapositions: militant marches past miniature amusement parks and
heated late night political meetings in thatched-roof bars that specialize in
blender drinks. Or a local cheese maker, the pride of the village for his Guinness
Book of World Records largest ever goat cheese, arrested and held in pretrial
detention for weeks. Based on circumstantial evidence, the cheese maker and
other villagers were suspects in an incident in which mining trucks and
bulldozers were torched by masked intruders.I5
Despite its remote location, the fate of the Skouries forest is a matter of
intense preoccupation for the entire country. It is debated in the national
parliament and on evening talk shows. For Greece’s huge progressive
movement, it is something of a cause célèbre: urban activists in Thessaloniki
and Athens organize mass demonstrations and travel to the woods for action
days and fundraising concerts. “Save Skouries” graffiti can be seen all over the
country and the official opposition party, the left-wing Syriza, has pledged that,
if elected, it will cancel the mine as one of its first acts in power.
The governing, austerity-enforcing coalition, on the other hand, has also
seized on Skouries as a symbol. Greek prime minister Antonis Samaras has

announced that the Eldorado mine will go ahead “at all costs,” such is the
importance of protecting “foreign investment in the country.” Invoking
Greece’s ongoing economic troubles, his coalition has claimed that building the
mine, despite the local opposition, is critical to sending a signal to world
markets that the country is open for business. That will allow the nation to
rapidly move ahead with a slate of other, highly controversial extractive projects
currently in the pipeline: drilling for oil and gas in the Aegean and Ionian seas;
new coal plants in the north; opening up previously protected beaches to largescale development; and multiple other mining projects. As one prominent
commentator put it, “This is the type of project that the country needs to
overcome the economic crisis.”6
Because of these national stakes, the state has unleashed a level of repression
against the anti-mine movement that is unprecedented in Greece since the dark
days of dictatorship. The forest has been transformed into a battle zone, with
rubber bullets reportedly fired and tear gas so thick it caused older residents to
collapse.7 And of course the checkpoints, which are staggered along all the
roads where heavy construction equipment has moved in.
But in this outpost of Blockadia, the police aren’t the only ones with
checkpoints: In Ierissos, local residents set up checkpoints at each entrance to
their village after over two hundred fully armed riot police marched through the
town’s narrow streets firing tear gas canisters in all directions; one exploded in
the schoolyard, causing children to choke in class.8 To make sure they are never
taken by surprise like this again, the checkpoints are staffed by volunteers
around the clock, and when police vehicles are spotted someone runs to the
church and rings the bell. In moments the streets are flooded with chanting
villagers.
Similar scenes, more reminiscent of civil war than political protest, are
unfolding in countless other pieces of contested land around the world, all of
which make up Blockadia’s multiplying front lines. About eight hundred
kilometers to the north of the Greek standoff, the farming village of Pungesti,
Romania, was gearing up for a showdown against Chevron and its plans to
launch the country’s first shale gas exploration well.9 In the fall of 2013, farmers
built a protest camp in a field, carted in supplies that could hold them for weeks,
dug a latrine, and vowed to prevent Chevron from drilling.

As in Greece, the response from the state was shockingly militarized,
especially in such a pastoral environment. An army of riot police with shields
and batons charged through the farm fields attacking peaceful demonstrators,
several of whom were beaten bloody and taken away in ambulances. At one
point angry villagers dismantled the fence protecting Chevron’s operation,
sparking more reprisals. In the village itself, riot police lined the streets like “a
kind of occupying army,” according to an eyewitness. Meanwhile, the roads into
town were bisected with police checkpoints and a travel ban was in force, which
conveniently prevented media from entering the conflict zone and even
reportedly blocked residents from grazing their cattle. For their part, villagers
explained that they had no choice but to stop an extraction activity that they
were convinced posed a grave threat to their livelihoods. “We live on
agriculture here,” one local reasoned. “We need clear water. What will our
cattle drink if the water gets spoiled?”10
Blockadia also stretches into multiple resource hot spots in Canada, my home
country. For instance, in October 2013—the same time that Pungesti was in the
news—a remarkably similar standoff was playing out in the province of New
Brunswick, on land claimed by the Elsipogtog First Nation, a Mi’kmaq
community whose roots in what is now eastern Canada go back some ten
thousand years. The people of Elsipogtog were leading a blockade against SWN
Resources, the Canadian subsidiary of a Texas-based company, as it tried to
conduct seismic testing ahead of a possible fracking operation. The land in
question has not been handed over by war or treaty and Canada’s highest court
has upheld the Mi’kmaq’s right to continue to access the natural resources of
those lands and waters—rights the protesters say would be rendered meaningless
if the territory becomes poisoned by fracking toxins.11
The previous June, members of the First Nation had announced the lighting
of a “sacred fire,” a ceremonial bonfire that would burn continuously for days,
and invited non-Native Canadians to join them in blockading the gas
company’s trucks. Many did, and for months demonstrators camped near the
seismic testing area, blocking roads and equipment as hand drums pounded out
traditional songs. On several occasions, trucks were prevented from working,
and at one point a Mi’kmaq woman strapped herself to a pile of seismic testing
gear to prevent it from being moved.
The conflict had been mostly peaceful but then on October 17, acting on an
injunction filed by the company, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police moved in
to clear the road. Once again, a rural landscape was turned into a war zone:

more than a hundred police officers—some armed with sniper rifles and
accompanied by attack dogs—fired beanbag rounds into the crowd, along with
streams of pepper spray and hoses. Elders and children were attacked and dozens
were arrested, including the elected chief of the Elsipogtog First Nation. Some
demonstrators responded by attacking police vehicles and by the end of the day,
five cop cars and one unmarked van had burned. “Native shale-gas protest
erupts in violence,” read a typical headline.12
Blockadia has popped up, too, in multiple spots in the British countryside,
where opponents of the U.K. government’s “dash for gas” have used a range of
creative tactics to disrupt industry activities, from protest picnics blockading the
road to a fracking drill site in the tiny hamlet of Balcombe, West Sussex, to
twenty-one activists shutting down a gas power station that towers over the
abandoned historical village of West Burton and its beautiful river, the “silver”
Trent, as Shakespeare describes it in Henry IV. After a daring climb, the group
set up camp for more than a week atop two ninety-meter-high water cooling
towers, making production impossible (the company was forced to drop a £5million lawsuit in the face of public pressure). More recently, activists blocked
the entrance to a fracking test site near the city of Manchester with a giant wind
turbine blade laid on its side.13
Blockadia was also aboard the Arctic Sunrise, when thirty Greenpeace
activists staged a protest in the Russian Arctic to draw attention to the dangers
of the rush to drill under the melting ice. Armed Coast Guard officers rappelled
onto the vessel from a helicopter, storming it commando-style, and the activists
were thrown in jail for two months.14 Originally facing charges of piracy, which
carry sentences of ten to fifteen years, the international activists were all
eventually freed and granted amnesty after the Russian government was shamed
by a huge international campaign, which included not just demonstrations in at
least forty-nine countries but pressure from numerous heads of state and eleven
Nobel Peace Prize winners (not to mention Paul McCartney).
The spirit of Blockadia can be seen even in the most repressive parts of
China, where herders in Inner Mongolia have rebelled against plans to turn
their fossil fuel–rich region into the country’s “energy base.” “When it’s windy,
we get covered in coal dust because it’s an open mine. And the water level
keeps dropping every year,” herder Wang Wenlin told the Los Angeles Times,
adding, “There’s really no point living here anymore.” With courageous actions
that have left several demonstrators dead outside the mines and blockades of

coal trucks, locals have staged rolling protests around the region and have been
met with ferocious state repression.15
It’s partly due to this kind of internal opposition to coal mining that China
imports increasing amounts of coal from abroad. But many of the places where
its coal comes from are in the throes of Blockadia-style uprisings of their own.
For instance, in New South Wales, Australia, opposition to new coal mining
operations grows more serious and sustained by the month. Beginning in August
2012, a coalition of groups established what they call the “first blockade camp of
a coal mine in Australia’s history,” where for a year and a half (and counting)
activists have chained themselves to various entrances of the Maules Creek
project—the largest mine under construction in the country, which along with
others in the area is set to decimate up to half of the 7,500-hectare (18,500
acre) Leard State Forest and to wield a greenhouse gas footprint representing
more than 5 percent of Australia’s annual emissions, according to one
estimate.16
Much of that coal is destined for export to Asia, however, so activists are also
gearing up to fight port expansions in Queensland that would hugely increase
the number of coal ships sailing from Australia each year, including through the
vulnerable ecosystem of the Great Barrier Reef, a World Heritage Site and the
earth’s largest natural structure made up of living creatures. The Australian
Marine Conservation Society describes the dredging of the ocean floor to make
way for increased coal traffic as an “unprecedented” threat to the fragile reef,
which is already under severe stress from ocean acidification and various forms
of pollution runoff.17
This is only the barest of sketches of the contours of Blockadia—but no
picture would be complete without the astonishing rise of resistance against
virtually any piece of infrastructure connected to the Alberta tar sands, whether
inside Canada or in the United States.
And none more so than TransCanada’s proposed Keystone XL pipeline. Part
of the broader Keystone Pipeline System crisscrossing the continent, the first
phase of the project, known as Keystone 1, got off to an inauspicious start. In its
first year or so of operation, pump stations along the pipeline spilled tar sands oil
fourteen times in the U.S. Most spills were small, but two of the biggest forced
the entire pipeline to shut down twice in a single month. In one of these cases, a
North Dakota rancher woke up to the sight of an oil geyser surging above the
cottonwood trees near his farm, remarking that it was “just like in the movies
when you strike oil and it’s shooting up.” If Keystone XL is constructed in full

(the southern leg, from Oklahoma to export terminals on the Texas coast, is
already up and running), the $7 billion project will add a total of 2,677
kilometers of new pipeline running through seven states and provinces,
delivering up to 830,000 barrels per day of mostly tar sands oil to Gulf Coast
refineries and export terminals.18
It was Keystone that provoked that historic wave of civil disobedience in
Washington, D.C., in 2011 (see page 139), followed by what were then the
largest protests in the history of the U.S. climate movement (more than 40,000
people outside the White House in February 2013). And it is Keystone that
brought together the unexpected alliance of Indigenous tribes and ranchers
along the pipeline route that became known as “the Cowboy and Indian
alliance” (not to mention unlikely coalitions that brought together vegan
activists who think meat is murder with cattle farmers whose homes are
decorated with deer heads). In fact the direct-action group Tar Sands Blockade
first coined the term “Blockadia” in August 2012, while planning what turned
into an eighty-six-day tree blockade challenging Keystone’s construction in East
Texas. This coalition has used every imaginable method to stop the pipeline’s
southern leg, from locking themselves inside a length of pipe that had not yet
been laid, to creating a complex network of treehouses and other structures
along the route.19
In Canada, it was the Northern Gateway pipeline, being pushed by the
energy company Enbridge, that similarly awoke the sleeping giant of latent
ecological outrage. The 1,177-kilometer pipe would begin near Edmonton,
Alberta, and carry 525,000 barrels of mostly diluted tar sands oil per day across
roughly one thousand waterways, passing through some of the most pristine
temperate rainforest in the world (and highly avalanche-prone mountains),
finally ending in a new export terminal in the northern British Columbia town
of Kitimat. There the oil would be loaded onto supertankers and then navigated
through narrow Pacific channels that are often battered by ferocious waves
(resorts in this part of B.C. market winter as “storm-watching” season). The
sheer audacity of the proposal—putting so much of Canada’s most beloved
wilderness, fishing grounds, beaches, and marine life at risk—helped give birth
to an unprecedented coalition of Canadians who oppose the project, including a
historic alliance of Indigenous groups in British Columbia who have vowed to
act as “an unbroken wall of opposition from the U.S. border to the Arctic
Ocean,” to stop any new pipeline that would carry tar sands oil through their
collective territory.20

The companies at the centers of these battles are still trying to figure out
what hit them. TransCanada, for instance, was so sure it would be able to push
through the Keystone XL pipeline without a hitch that it went ahead and
bought over $1 billion worth of pipe. And why not? President Obama has an
“all of the above” energy strategy, and Canadian prime minister Stephen Harper
called the project a “no-brainer.” But instead of the rubberstamp TransCanada
was expecting, the project sparked a movement so large it revived (and
reinvented) U.S. environmentalism.21
Spend enough time in Blockadia and you start to notice patterns. The
slogans on the signs: “Water is life,” “You can’t eat money,” “Draw the line.” A
shared determination to stay in the fight for the long haul, and to do whatever it
takes to win. Another recurring element is the prominent role played by
women, who often dominate the front lines, providing not only powerful moral
leadership but also some of these movements’ most enduring iconography. In
New Brunswick, for instance, the image of a lone Mi’kmaq mother, kneeling in
the middle of the highway before a line of riot police, holding up a single eagle
feather went viral. In Greece, the gesture that captured hearts and minds was
when a seventy-four-year-old woman confronted a line of riot police by belting
out a revolutionary song that had been sung by the Greek resistance against
German occupation. From Romania, the image of an old woman wearing a
babushka and holding a knobby walking stick went around the world under the
caption: “You know your government has failed when your grandma starts to
riot.”22
The various toxic threats these communities are up against seem to be
awakening impulses that are universal, even primal—whether it’s the fierce
drive to protect children from harm, or a deep connection to land that had been
previously suppressed. And though reported in the mainstream press as isolated
protests against specific projects, these sites of resistance increasingly see
themselves as part of a global movement, one opposing the latest commodities
rush wherever it is taking place. Social media in particular has allowed
geographically isolated communities to tell their stories to the world, and for
those stories, in turn, to become part of a transnational narrative about
resistance to a common ecological crisis.
So busloads of anti-fracking and anti-mountaintop-removal activists traveled
to Washington, D.C., to protest the Keystone XL pipeline, knowing they are up
against a common enemy: the push into ever more extreme and high-risk forms
of fossil fuel. Communities in France, upon discovering that their land has been

leased to a gas company for something called “hydraulic fracturing”—a
previously unknown practice in Europe—got in contact with French-speaking
activists in Quebec, who had successfully won a moratorium against the practice
(and they, in turn, relied heavily on U.S. activists, in particular the
documentary film Gasland, which has proved to be a potent global organizing
tool).II23 And eventually the entire global movement came together for a
“Global Frackdown” in September 2012, with actions in two hundred
communities in more than twenty countries, with even more participating a
year later.
Something else unites this network of local resistance: widespread awareness
of the climate crisis, and the understanding that these new extraction projects—
which produce far more carbon dioxide, in the case of the tar sands, and more
methane, in the case of fracking, than their conventional counterparts—are
taking the entire planet in precisely the wrong direction. These activists
understand that keeping carbon in the ground, and protecting ancient, carbonsequestering forests from being clear-cut for mines, is a prerequisite for
preventing catastrophic warming. So while these conflicts are invariably sparked
by local livelihood and safety concerns, the global stakes are never far from the
surface.
Ecuadorian biologist Esperanza Martínez, one of the leaders of the movement
for an “oil-free Amazon,” asks the question at the heart of all of these
campaigns: “Why should we sacrifice new areas if fossil fuels should not be
extracted in the first place?” Indeed, if the movement has a guiding theory, it is
that it is high time to close, rather than expand, the fossil fuel frontier. Seattlebased environmental policy expert KC Golden has called this “the Keystone
Principle.” He explains, “Keystone isn’t simply a pipeline in the sand for the
swelling national climate movement.” It’s an expression of the core principle
that before we can effectively solve this crisis, we have to “stop making it worse.
Specifically and categorically, we must cease making large, long-term capital
investments in new fossil fuel infrastructure that ‘locks in’ dangerous emission
levels for many decades . . . step one for getting out of a hole: Stop digging.”24
So if Obama’s energy policy is “all of the above”—which effectively means
full steam ahead with fossil fuel extraction, complemented with renewables
around the margins—Blockadia is responding with a tough philosophy that
might be described as “None of the below.” It is based on the simple principle
that it’s time to stop digging up poisons from the deep and shift, with all speed,
to powering our lives from the abundant energies on our planet’s surface.

Operation Climate Change
While the scale and connectivity of this kind of anti-extraction activism is
certainly new, the movement began long before the fight against Keystone XL.
If it’s possible to trace this wave back to a time and place, it should probably be
the 1990s in what is surely the most oil-ravaged place on the planet: the Niger
Delta.
Since the doors to foreign investors were flung open near the end of British
colonial rule, oil companies have pumped hundreds of billions of dollars’ worth
of crude out of Nigeria, most from the Niger Delta, while consistently treating
its land, water, and people with undisguised disdain. Wastewater was dumped
directly into rivers, streams, and the sea; canals from the ocean were dug willynilly, turning precious freshwater sources salty, and pipelines were left exposed
and unmaintained, contributing to thousands of spills. In an often cited statistic,
an Exxon Valdez–worth of oil has spilled in the Delta every year for about fifty
years, poisoning fish, animals, and humans.25
But none of this compares with the misery that is gas flaring. Over the course
of extracting oil, a large amount of natural gas is also produced. If the
infrastructure for capturing, transporting, and using that gas were built in
Nigeria, it could meet the electricity needs of the entire country. Yet in the
Delta, the multinational companies mostly opt to save money by setting it on
fire, or flaring it, which sends the gas into the atmosphere in great pillars of
polluting fire. The practice is responsible for about 40 percent of Nigeria’s total
CO2 emissions (which is why, as discussed, some companies are absurdly trying
to collect carbon credits for stopping this practice). Meanwhile, more than half
of Delta communities lack electricity and running water, unemployment is
rampant, and, in a cruel irony, the region is plagued by fuel shortages.26
Since the 1970s, Nigerians living in the Delta have been demanding redress
for the damage done to them by multinational oil giants. The fight entered a
new phase at the start of the 1990s when the Ogoni—a relatively small
Indigenous group in the Niger Delta—organized the Movement for the Survival
of the Ogoni People (MOSOP), led by the famed human rights activist and
playwright Ken Saro-Wiwa. The group took particular aim at Shell, which had
extracted $5.2 billion from Ogoniland between 1958 and 1993.27
The new organization did more than beg the government for better
conditions, it asserted the rights of the Ogoni people to control the resources
under their lands and set about taking those rights back. Not only were oil

installations shut down, but as Nigerian political ecologist and environmental
activist Godwin Uyi Ojo writes that, on January 4, 1993, “an estimated 300,000
Ogoni, including women and children, staged a historic nonviolent protest, and
marched against Shell’s ‘ecological wars.’ ” That year, Shell was forced to pull
out of Ogoni territory, forsaking significant revenues (though the company
remains the biggest oil player in other parts of the Delta). Saro-Wiwa stated
that the Nigerian state “will have to shoot and kill every Ogoni man, woman
and child to take more of their oil.”28
To this day, oil production has ceased in Ogoniland—a fact that remains one
of the most significant achievements of grassroots environmental activism
anywhere in the world. Because of Ogoni resistance, carbon has stayed in the
ground and out of the atmosphere. In the two decades since Shell withdrew, the
land has slowly begun to heal, and there are tentative reports of improved
farming output. This represents, according to Ojo, “on a global scale, the most
formidable community-wide resistance to corporate oil operations.”29
But Shell’s banishment was not the end of the story. From the start of the
protests, the Nigerian government—which relies on oil for 80 percent of its
revenues and 95 percent of its export earnings—saw the organized Ogoni as a
grave threat. As the region mobilized to take its land back from Shell, thousands
of Delta residents were tortured and killed and dozens of Ogoni villages were
razed. In 1995, the military regime of General Sani Abacha tried Ken SaroWiwa and eight of his compatriots on trumped-up charges. And then all nine
men were hanged, fulfilling Saro-Wiwa’s prediction that “they are going to
arrest us all and execute us. All for Shell.”30
It was a wrenching blow to the movement, but residents of the Niger Delta
fought on. By employing increasingly militant tactics like taking over offshore
oil platforms, oil barges, and flow stations, this community-led resistance
managed to shut down roughly twenty oil installations, significantly reducing
production.31
A key and little examined chapter in the Niger Delta’s fossil fuel resistance
took place at the tail end of 1998. Five thousand young people belonging to the
Ijaw Nation, one of the largest ethnic groups in Nigeria, held a gathering in
Kaiama, a town in a southern province of the Delta. There, the Ijaw Youth
Council drafted the Kaiama Declaration, which asserted that 70 pecent of the
government’s oil revenues came from Ijaw land and that, “Despite these huge
contributions, our reward from the Nigerian State remains avoidable deaths
resulting from ecological devastation and military repression.” The declaration

—endorsed by a huge cross-section of Delta society—stated: “All land and
natural resources (including mineral resources) within the Ijaw territory belong
to Ijaw communities and are the basis of our survival,” and went on to demand
“Self Government and resource control.”32
But it was Clause 4 that commanded the most attention: “We, therefore,
demand that all oil companies stop all exploration and exploitation activities in
the Ijaw area. . . . Hence, we advise all oil companies staff and contractors to
withdraw from Ijaw territories by the 30th December, 1998 pending the
resolution of the issue of resource ownership and control in the Ijaw area of the
Niger Delta.”33
The Ijaw Youth Council voted unanimously to call their new offensive
Operation Climate Change. “The idea was: we are going to change our world,”
Isaac Osuoka, one of the movement’s organizers, told me. “There was an
understanding of the link that the same crude oil that impoverishes us, also
impoverishes the Earth. And that a movement to change the wider world can
begin from changing our own world.” This was, in other words, an attempt at
another kind of climate change—an effort by a group of people whose lands had
been poisoned and whose future was imperiled to change their political climate,
their security climate, their economic climate, and even their spiritual
climate.34
As promised, on December 30 the youth took to the streets in the thousands.
The leadership instructed participants not to carry weapons and not to drink.
The demonstrations—called Ogeles, which are traditional Ijaw processions—
were nonviolent and dramatic. Many participants wore black, held candles,
sang, danced, and drummed. Several oil platforms were occupied, not with arms
but through the sheer numbers of bodies that overwhelmed security guards.
“Sometimes,” Osuoka recalled in a phone interview, “a person will have worked
for a short time for the oil companies, so they knew which valve was the one to
turn off.”
The Nigerian government’s response was overwhelming. An estimated
fifteen thousand troops were mobilized, warships were sent, as were fleets of
tanks. In some regions the government declared a state of emergency and
imposed a curfew. According to Osouka, “In village after village, soldiers
deployed by the state opened fire on unarmed citizens.” In the towns of
“Kaiama, Mbiama, and Yenagoa people were killed in the streets and women
and young girls were raped in their homes as the state unleashed mayhem,
ostensibly to defend oil installations.”35

The confrontations continued for about a week. By the end, as many as 200
or possibly more lives were reported lost, and dozens of houses had been burned
to the ground. In at least one case, the soldiers who conducted lethal raids flew
into the area on a helicopter taken from a Chevron operation. (The oil giant
claimed it had no choice but to allow the equipment to be used by the military,
since it came from a joint venture with the Nigerian government, though as
Human Rights Watch noted, “The company did not issue any public protest at
the killings; nor has it stated that it will take any steps to avoid similar incidents
in the future.”)36
Brutal events like these go a long way toward explaining why many young
people in the Niger Delta today have lost their faith in nonviolence. And why,
by 2006, the area was in the throes of a full-blown armed insurgency, complete
with bombings of oil infrastructure and government targets, rampant pipeline
vandalism, ransom kidnapping of oil workers (designated as “enemy
combatants” by the militants), and, more recently, amnesty deals that offered
cash for guns. Godwin Uyi Ojo writes that, as the armed conflict wore on,
“grievance was soon mingled with greed and violent crimes.”37 In the process,
the original goals of the movement—to stop the ecological plunder, and take
back control over the region’s resource—became harder to decipher.
And yet it is worth looking back to the 1990s when the aims were clear.
Because what is evident in the original struggles of the Ogoni and Ijaw is that
the fight against violent resource extraction and the fight for greater community
control, democracy, and sovereignty are two sides of the same coin. The
Nigerian experience also had a huge and largely uncredited influence on other
resource-rich regions in the Global South that found themselves facing off
against multinational oil giants.
The most important such exchange took place in 1995, immediately after the
killing of Ken Saro-Wiwa, when activists from Environmental Rights Action in
Nigeria formed an alliance with a similar organization in Ecuador, called Acción
Ecológica. At that time Acción Ecológica was neck deep in an environmental
and human health disaster that Texaco had left behind in a northeastern region
of the country, an incident that became known as the “Rainforest Chernobyl.”
(Chevron, after acquiring Texaco, was later ordered to pay $9.5 billion in
damages by the Ecuadorian supreme court; the legal battles are still ongoing).38
These frontline activists in two of the worst oil-impacted regions on the planet
formed an organization called Oilwatch International, which has been at the

forefront of the global movement to “leave the oil in the soil” and whose
influence can be felt throughout Blockadia.
As the experiences in Nigeria and Ecuador make clear, anti-extraction activism
is not a new phenomenon. Communities with strong ties to the land have
always, and will always, defend themselves against businesses that threaten their
ways of life. And fossil fuel resistance has a long history in the United States,
most notably against mountaintop removal coal mining in Appalachia.
Moreover, direct action against reckless resource extraction has been a part of
the environmental movement for a very long time and has succeeded in
protecting some of the planet’s most biologically diverse lands and waters. Many
of the specific tactics being used by Blockadia activists today—tree-sits and
equipment lockdowns in particular—were developed by Earth First! in the
1980s, when the group fought “wars in the woods” against clear-cut logging.
What has changed in recent years is largely a matter of scale, which is itself a
reflection of the dizzying ambitions of the extractive project at this point in
history. The rise of Blockadia is, in many ways, simply the flip side of the carbon
boom. Thanks to a combination of high commodity prices, new technologies,
and depleted conventional reserves, the industry is going further on every front.
It is extracting more, pushing into more territory, and relying on more risky
methods. Each of these factors is fueling the backlash, so it’s worth looking at
each in turn.

All in the Sacrifice Zone
Though there are certainly new and amplified risks associated with our era of
extreme energy (tar sands, fracking for both oil and gas, deepwater drilling,
mountaintop removal coal mining), it’s important to remember that these have
never been safe or low-risk industries. Running an economy on energy sources
that release poisons as an unavoidable part of their extraction and refining has
always required sacrifice zones—whole subsets of humanity categorized as less
than fully human, which made their poisoning in the name of progress somehow
acceptable.
And for a very long time, sacrifice zones all shared a few elements in
common. They were poor places. Out-of-the-way places. Places where residents
lacked political power, usually having to do with some combination of race,

language, and class. And the people who lived in these condemned places knew
they had been written off. To quote Paula Swearengin, an activist from a coal
mining family near Beckley, West Virginia, a landscape ravaged by
mountaintop-removal coal mining: “We live in the land of the lost.”39
Through various feats of denialism and racism, it was possible for privileged
people in North America and Europe to mentally cordon off these unlucky
places as hinterlands, wastelands, nowheres—or unluckiest of all, as in the case
of Nauru, middle of nowheres. For those fortunate enough to find ourselves
outside those condemned borders, myself among them, it seemed as if our places
—the ones where we live and to which we escape for pleasure (the assumed
somewheres, the centers, or best of all, the centers of everywhere)—would not
be sacrificed to keep the fossil fuel machine going.
And up until quite recently, that has held up as the grand bargain of the
carbon age: the people reaping the bulk of the benefits of extractivism pretend
not to see the costs of that comfort so long as the sacrifice zones are kept safely
out of view.
But in less than a decade of the extreme energy frenzy and the commodity
boom, the extractive industries have broken that unspoken bargain. In very
short order, the sacrifice zones have gotten a great deal larger, swallowing ever
more territory and putting many people who thought they were safe at risk. Not
only that, but several of the largest zones targeted for sacrifice are located in
some of the wealthiest and most powerful countries in the world. For instance,
Daniel Yergin, energy industry consultant (and author of The Prize),
euphorically described the newfound capacity to extract oil from “tight rock”
formations—usually shale—as being akin to discovering whole new petrostates:
“This is like adding another Venezuela or Kuwait by 2020, except these tight oil
fields are in the United States.”40
And of course it’s not just the communities next to these new oil fields that
are asked to sacrifice. So much oil is now being extracted in the U.S. (or “Saudi
America,” as some market watchers call it) that the number of rail cars carrying
oil has increased by 4111 percent in just five years, from 9,500 cars in 2008 to an
estimated 400,000 in 2013. (Little wonder that significantly more oil spilled in
U.S. rail incidents in 2013 than spilled in the previous forty years combined—or
that trains engulfed in smoking fireballs have become increasingly frequent
sights on the nightly news.) In practice this means that hundreds if not
thousands of towns and cities suddenly find themselves in the paths of poorly
maintained, underregulated “oil bomb” trains—towns like Quebec’s Lac-

Mégantic, where, in July 2013, a train carrying seventy-two tank cars of fracked
Bakken oil (more flammable than the regular kind) exploded, killing forty-seven
people and flattening half of its picturesque downtown. (Former North Dakota
governor George Sinner said the oil trains posed a “ridiculous threat” shortly
after one blew up near his native town of Casselton.)41
The Alberta tar sands, meanwhile, are growing so fast that the industry will
soon be producing more of its particular brand of high-carbon oil than current
pipeline capacity can handle—which is why it is so determined to push projects
like Keystone XL through the U.S. and Northern Gateway through British
Columbia. “If there was something that kept me up at night,” said Alberta’s
(then) energy minister Ron Liepert in June 2011, “it would be the fear that
before too long we’re going to be landlocked in bitumen. We’re not going to be
an energy superpower if we can’t get the oil out of Alberta.”42 But building
those pipelines, as we have seen, impacts a huge number of communities: the
ones living along thousands of kilometers of proposed pipe, as well as those who
live along vast stretches of coastline that would see their waters crowded with
oil tankers, courting disaster.
No place, it seems, is off limits, and no extractive activity has set its sights on
more new land than hydraulic fracturing for natural gas. To quote Chesapeake
Energy’s then-CEO Aubrey McClendon, in 2010, “In the last few years we have
discovered the equivalent of two Saudi Arabias of oil in the form of natural gas
in the United States. Not one, but two.”43 Which is why the industry is fighting
to frack wherever it can. The Marcellus Shale, for instance, spans parts of
Pennsylvania, Ohio, New York, West Virginia, Virginia, and Maryland. And it
is just one of many such massive blankets of methane-rich rock.
The endgame, according to Republican politician Rick Santorum, is to “drill
everywhere”—and it shows. As The Guardian’s Suzanne Goldenberg reports,
“Energy companies have fracked wells on church property, school grounds and
in gated developments. Last November, an oil company put a well on the
campus of the University of North Texas in nearby Denton, right next to the
tennis courts and across the road from the main sports stadium and a stand of
giant wind turbines.” Fracking now covers so much territory that, according to a
2013 Wall Street Journal investigation, “more than 15 million Americans live
within a mile of a well that has been drilled and fracked since 2000.”44
In Canada, the ambitions are just as aggressive. “As of mid-2012, the entire
underground subsoil of Montréal, Laval, and Longueuil (three of the main cities
in Québec) had been claimed by gas and petrol companies,” reports Kim

Cornelissen, a former politician turned anti-fracking campaigner in the
province. (So far, Quebec’s residents have managed to fend off the gas
companies with a moratorium.) In Britain, the area under consideration for
fracking adds up to about half the entire island. And in July 2013, residents of
the northeast of England were enraged to hear their region described as
“uninhabited and desolate” in the House of Lords—and therefore eminently
deserving of sacrifice. “Certainly in part of the northeast where there’s plenty of
room for fracking, well away from anybody’s residence where we could conduct
[it] without any kind of threat to the rural environment,” said Lord Howell, who
had been an energy advisor to David Cameron’s government.45
This is coming as a rude surprise to a great many historically privileged
people who suddenly find themselves feeling something of what so many
frontline communities have felt for a very long time: how is it possible that a big
distant company can come to my land and put me and my kids at risk—and
never even ask my permission? How can it be legal to put chemicals in the air
right where they know children are playing? How is it possible that the state,
instead of protecting me from this attack, is sending police to beat up people
whose only crime is trying to protect their families?
This unwelcome awakening has made the fossil fuel sector a whole lot of
enemies out of onetime friends. People like South Dakota cattle rancher John
Harter, who went to court to try to stop TransCanada from burying a portion of
the Keystone XL pipeline on his land. “I’ve never considered myself a bunny
hugger,” he told a reporter, “but I guess if that’s what I’ve got to be called now,
I’m OK with it.” The industry has also alienated people like Christina Mills,
who worked as an auditor for oil companies in Oklahoma for much of her
career. But when a gas company started fracking in her middle-class North
Texas subdivision, her views of the sector changed. “They made it personal
here, and that’s when I had a problem. . . . They came into the back of our
neighbourhood, 300ft from the back fence. That is so intrusive.”46
And fracking opponents could only laugh when, in February 2014, it
emerged that none other than Exxon CEO Rex Tillerson had quietly joined a
lawsuit opposing fracking-related activities near his $5 million Texas home,
claiming it would lower property values. “I would like to officially welcome Rex
to the ‘Society of Citizens Really Enraged When Encircled by Drilling’
(SCREWED),” wrote Jared Polis, a Democratic Congressman from Colorado, in
a sardonic statement. “This select group of everyday citizens has been fighting
for years to protect their property values, the health of their local communities,

and the environment. We are thrilled to have the CEO of a major international
oil and gas corporation join our quickly multiplying ranks.”47
In 1776, Tom Paine wrote in his rabble-rousing pamphlet Common Sense, “It
is the good fortune of many to live distant from the scene of sorrow.”48 Well,
the distance is closing, and soon enough no one will be safe from the sorrow of
ecocide. In a way, the name of the company at the center of Greece’s antimining movement says it all: Eldorado—a reference to the legendary “lost city
of gold” that drove the conquistadors to some of their bloodiest massacres in the
Americas. This kind of pillage used to be reserved for non-European countries,
with the loot returned to the motherland in Europe. But as Eldorado’s activities
in northern Greece make clear, today the conquistadors are pillaging on their
home turf as well.
That may prove to have been a grave strategic error. As Montana-based
environmental writer and activist Nick Engelfried puts it, “Every fracking well
placed near a city’s water supply and every coal train rolling through a small
town gives some community a reason to hate fossil industries. And by failing to
notice this, oil, gas and coal companies may be digging their political graves.”49
None of this means that environmental impacts are suddenly evenly
distributed. Historically marginalized people in the Global South, as well as
communities of color in the Global North, are still at far greater risk of living
downstream from a mine, next door to a refinery, or next to a pipeline, just as
they are more vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. But in the era of
extreme energy, there is no longer the illusion of discreet sacrifice zones
anymore. As Deeohn Ferris, formerly with the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil
Rights Under Law, aptly put it, “we’re all in the same sinking boat, only people
of color are closest to the hole.”50
Another boundary breaker is, of course, climate change. Because while there
are still plenty of people who are fortunate enough to live somewhere that is not
(yet) directly threatened by the extreme energy frenzy, no one is exempt from
the real-world impacts of increasingly extreme weather, or from the simmering
psychological stress of knowing that we may very well grow old—and our young
children may well grow up—in a climate significantly more treacherous than
the one we currently enjoy. Like an oil spill that spreads from open water into
wetlands, beaches, riverbeds, and down to the ocean floor, its toxins
reverberating through the lifecycles of countless species, the sacrifice zones
created by our collective fossil fuel dependence are creeping and spreading like
great shadows over the earth. After two centuries of pretending that we could

quarantine the collateral damage of this filthy habit, fobbing the risks off on
others, the game is up, and we are all in the sacrifice zone now.

Choked in Enemy Territory
The fossil fuel industry’s willingness to break the sacrifice bargain in order to
reach previously off-limits pools of carbon has galvanized the new climate
movement in several important ways. For one, the scope of many new
extraction and transportation projects has created opportunities for people
whose voices are traditionally shut out of the dominant conversation to form
alliances with those who have significantly more social power. Tar sands
pipelines have proven to be a particularly potent silo buster in this regard, and
something of a gift to political organizing.
Beginning in northern Alberta, in a region where the worst impacts are being
felt by Indigenous people, and often ending in places where the worst health
impacts are felt by urban communities of color, these pipelines pass a whole lot
of other places in between. After all, the same piece of infrastructure will travel
through multiple states or provinces (or both); through the watersheds of big
cities and tiny towns; through farmlands and fishing rivers; through more lands
claimed by Indigenous people and through land occupied by the upper middle
class. And despite their huge differences, everyone along the route is up against
a common threat and therefore are potential allies. In the 1990s, it was trade
deals that brought huge and unlikely coalitions together; today it is fossil fuel
infrastructure.
Before the most recent push into extreme energy, Big Oil and Big Coal had
grown accustomed to operating in regions where they are so economically
omnipotent that they pretty much ran the show. In places like Louisiana,
Alberta, and Kentucky—not to mention Nigeria and, until the Chávez era,
Venezuela—the fossil fuel companies treat politicians as their unofficial PR
wings and the judiciaries as their own personal legal departments. With so many
jobs, and such a large percentage of the tax base on the line, regular people put
up with an awful lot too. For instance, even after the Deepwater Horizon
disaster, many Louisianans wanted higher safety standards and a bigger share of
the royalties from offshore oil wealth—but most didn’t join calls for a
moratorium on deepwater drilling, despite all they had suffered.51

This is the Catch-22 of the fossil fuel economy: precisely because these
activities are so dirty and disruptive, they tend to weaken or even destroy other
economic drivers: fish stocks are hurt by pollution, the scarred landscape
becomes less attractive to tourists, and farmland becomes unhealthy. But rather
than spark a popular backlash, this slow poisoning can end up strengthening the
power of the fossil fuel companies because they end up being virtually the only
game in town.
As the extractive industries charge into territories previously considered out
of bounds, however, they are suddenly finding themselves up against people who
are far less compromised. In many of the new carbon frontiers, as well as in
territories through which fossil fuel companies must move their product, the
water is still relatively clean, the relationship to the land is still strong—and
there are a great many people willing to fight very hard to protect ways of life
that they view as inherently incompatible with toxic extraction.
For instance, one of the natural gas industry’s biggest strategic mistakes was
deciding it wanted to frack in and around Ithaca, New York—a liberal college
town with a vibrant economic localization movement and blessed with
breathtaking gorges and waterfalls. Faced with a direct threat to its idyllic
community, Ithaca became not just a hub for anti-fracking activism but a center
for serious academic research into the unexplored risks: it’s likely no
coincidence that researchers at Cornell University, based in Ithaca, produced
the game-changing study on methane emissions linked to fracking, whose
findings became an indispensable tool for the global resistance movement. And
it was the industry’s great misfortune that famed biologist and author Sandra
Steingraber, a world-renowned expert on the link between industrial toxins and
cancer, had recently taken up a post at Ithaca College. Steingraber threw herself
into the fracking fight, providing expert testimony before countless audiences
and helping to mobilize tens of thousands of New Yorkers. This work
contributed to not just keeping the frackers out of Ithaca but to a total of nearly
180 fracking bans or moratoria adopted by cities and towns across the state.52
The industry badly miscalculated again when it began construction on a
12,260-horsepower compressor station carrying Pennsylvania’s fracked gas
smack in the middle of the town of Minisink, New York. Many homes were
within half a mile of the facility, including one just 180 meters away. And the
town’s residents weren’t the only ones whose health was threatened by the
station. The surrounding area is prized agricultural land dotted with small family
farms, orchards, and vineyards growing organic and artisanal produce for New

York’s farmer’s markets and locavore restaurants. So Millennium Pipeline—the
company behind the compressor—found itself up against not just a bunch of
angry, local farmers but also a whole lot of angry New York City hipsters,
celebrity chefs, and movie stars like Mark Ruffalo, calling not just for an end to
fracking but for the state to shift to 100 percent renewables.53
And then there was the almost unfathomably stupid idea of trying to open up
some of Europe’s first major fracking operations nowhere other than the South
of France. When residents of the Department of Var—known for its olives, figs,
sheep, and for the famed beaches of Saint-Tropez—discovered that several of
their communities were in line for gas fracking, they organized furiously.
Economist and activist Maxime Combes describes scenes around southern
France at the inception of the movement, where “the halls of the townmeetings in impacted communities were packed to overflowing, and very often,
there were more participants in these meetings than inhabitants in the villages.”
Var, Combes wrote, would soon experience “the largest citizen’s mobilization
seen in the history of a Department that is usually on the right of the political
spectrum.” As a result of the industry’s French folly, it ended up not just losing
the right to frack near the Riviera (at least for now), but in 2011 France became
the first country to adopt a nationwide fracking ban.54
Even something as routine as getting heavy machinery up to northern
Alberta to keep the tar sands mines and upgraders running has ignited new
resistance movements. In keeping with the mammoth scale of everything
associated with the largest industrial project on earth, the machines being
transported, which are manufactured in South Korea, can be about as long and
heavy as a Boeing 747, and some of the “heavy hauls,” as they are called, are
three stories high. The shipments are so large, in fact, that these behemoths
cannot be trucked normally. Instead, oil companies like ExxonMobil have to
load them onto specialty trailers that take up more than two lanes of highway,
and are too high to make it under most standard overpasses.55
The only roads that meet the oil companies’ needs are located in distinctly
hostile territory. For instance, communities in Montana and Idaho have led a
fierce multi-year campaign to prevent the rigs from traveling along the scenic
but narrow Highway 12. They object to the human costs of having their critical
roadway blocked for hours so that the huge machines can pass, as well as to the
environmental risks of a load toppling on one of many hairpin turns and ending
up in a stream or river (this is fly-fishing country and locals are passionate about
their wild rivers).

In October 2010, a small crew of local activists took me on a drive along the
part of Highway 12 that the so-called big rigs would have to travel. We went
past groves of cedar and Douglas fir and glowing, golden-tipped larch, past signs
for moose crossings and under towering rock outcroppings. As we drove, with
fall leaves rushing downstream in Lolo Creek next to the road, my guides
scouted locations for an “action camp” they were planning. It would bring
together anti–tar sands activists from Alberta, ranchers, and Indigenous tribes
all along the proposed route of the Keystone XL pipeline, and locals interested
in stopping the big rigs on Highway 12. They discussed a friend who had offered
to set up a mobile kitchen and the logistics of camping in early winter. Marty
Cobenais, then the pipeline campaigner for the Indigenous Environmental
Network, explained how all the campaigns are connected. “If they can stop the
rigs here then it affects the [production] capacity in the tar sands to get the oil
to put in the pipelines.” Then he smiles. “That’s why we are building a Cowboys
and Indians alliance.”56
Following a long fight, the rigs were ultimately barred from this section of
Highway 12 after the Nez Perce tribe and the conservation group Idaho Rivers
United filed a joint lawsuit. “They made a huge mistake trying to go through
western Montana and Idaho,” Alexis Bonogofsky, a Billings, Montana, based
goat rancher and activist, told me. “It’s been fun to watch.”57
An alternate route for the huge trucks was eventually found, this one taking
them through eastern Oregon. Another bad move. When the first load made its
way through the state in December 2013, it was stopped several times by activist
lockdowns and blockades. Members of the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla
Indian Reservation, objecting to the loads crossing their ancestral lands, led a
prayer ceremony near the second shipment in Pendleton, Oregon. And though
local concerns about the safety of the big rigs were real, many participants were
clear that they were primarily motivated by fears over what these machines were
helping to do to our climate once they arrived at their destination. “This has
gone too far,” said one Umatilla blockader before she was arrested. “Our
children are going to die from this.”58
Indeed, the oil and coal industries are no doubt cursing the day that they
ever encountered the Pacific Northwest—Oregon, Washington State, and
British Columbia. There the sector has had to confront a powerful combination
of resurgent Indigenous Nations, farmers, and fishers whose livelihoods depend
on clean water and soil, and a great many relative newcomers who have chosen
to live in that part of the world because of its natural beauty. It is also,

significantly, a region where the local environmental movement never fully
succumbed to the temptations of the corporate partnership model, and where
there is a long and radical history of land-based direct action to stop clear-cut
logging and dirty mining.
This has meant fierce opposition to tar sands pipelines, as we have seen. And
the deep-seated ecological values of the Pacific Northwest have also become the
bane of the U.S. coal industry in recent years. Between grassroots resistance to
building new coal-fired plants, and pressure to shut down old ones, as well as the
rapid rise of natural gas, the market for coal in the United States has collapsed.
In a span of just four years, between 2008 and 2012, coal’s share of U.S.
electricity generation plummeted from about 50 percent to 37 percent. That
means that if the industry is to have a future, it needs to ship U.S. coal to parts
of the world that still want it in large quantities. That means Asia. (It’s a
strategy that global energy expert and author Michael T. Klare has compared to
the one tobacco companies began to employ a few decades ago: “Just as health
officials now condemn Big Tobacco’s emphasis on cigarette sales to poor people
in countries with inadequate health systems,” he writes, “so someday Big
Energy’s new ‘smoking’ habit will be deemed a massive threat to human
survival.”) The problem for the coal companies is that U.S. ports along the
Pacific Coast are not equipped for such large coal shipments, which means that
the industry needs to build new terminals. It also needs to dramatically increase
the number of trains carrying coal from the massive mines of the Powder River
Basin, in Wyoming and Montana, to the Northwest.59
As with the tar sands pipelines and the heavy hauls, the greatest obstacle to
the coal industry’s plans to reach the sea has been the defiant refusal of residents
of the Pacific Northwest to play along. Every community in Washington State
and Oregon that was slated to become the new home of a coal export terminal
rose up in protest, fueled by health concerns about coal dust, but also, once
again, by larger concerns about the global impact of burning all that coal.
This was expressed forcefully by KC Golden, who has helped to usher in
many of the most visionary climate policies in Washington State, when he
wrote: “The great Pacific Northwest is not a global coal depot, a pusher for fossil
fuel addiction, a logistics hub for climate devastation. We’re the last place on
Earth that should settle for a tired old retread of the false choice between jobs
and the environment. Coal export is fundamentally inconsistent with our vision
and values. It’s not just a slap in the face to ‘green’ groups. It’s a moral disaster
and an affront to our identity as a community.”60 After all, what is the point of

installing solar panels and rainwater barrels if they are going to be coated in coal
dust?
What these campaigns are discovering is that while it’s next to impossible to
win a direct fight against the fossil fuel companies on their home turf, the
chances of victory greatly increase when the battleground extends into a
territory where the industry is significantly weaker—places where nonextractive
ways of life still flourish and where residents (and politicians) are less addicted
to petro and coal dollars. And as the corroded tentacles of extreme energy reach
out in all directions like a giant metal spider, the industry is pushing into a
whole lot of those kinds of places.
Something else is going on too. As resistance to the extractive industries
gains ground along these far-flung limbs, it is starting to spread back to the body
of carbon country—lending new courage to resist even in those places that the
fossil fuel industry thought it had already conquered.
The city of Richmond, California, across the bay from San Francisco,
provides a glimpse of how quickly the political landscape can change.
Predominantly African American and Latino, the city is a rough-edged,
working-class pocket amidst the relentless tech-fuelled gentrification of the Bay
Area. In Richmond, the big employer isn’t Google, it’s Chevron, whose huge
refinery local residents blame for myriad health and safety problems, from
elevated asthma rates to frequent accidents at the hulking facility (including a
massive fire in 1999 that sent hundreds to hospital). And yet as the city’s largest
business and employer Chevron still had the power to call the shots.61
No more. In 2009 community members successfully blocked a plan by
Chevron to significantly expand its oil refinery, which could have allowed the
plant to process heavier, dirtier crudes such as bitumen from the tar sands. A
coalition of environmental justice groups challenged the expansion in the
streets and in the courts, arguing that it would further pollute Richmond’s air. In
the end, a superior court ruled against Chevron, citing a wholly inadequate
environmental impact report (which “fails as an informational document,” the
judge tartly remarked). Chevron appealed, but in 2010 it lost again. “This is a
victory for the grassroots, and the people who have been suffering the health
impacts of the refinery for the past 100 years,” said Asian Pacific Environmental
Network senior organizer Torm Nompraseurt.62
Richmond is not the only place dominated by Big Oil finding new reserves of
courage to fight back. As the anti–tar sands movement spreads through North
America and Europe, Indigenous communities in the belly of the beast—the

ones who were raising the alarm about the dangers of the tar sands long before
large environmental groups showed any interest in the issue—have also been
emboldened to go further than ever. They’ve launched new lawsuits for
violations of their land rights, with potentially grave ramifications for industry’s
access to carbon reserves, and delegations from deeply impacted First Nations
communities are now constantly traveling the globe to alert more people to the
devastation of their territories in the hopes that more arteries will be severed.
One of these activists is Melina Laboucan-Massimo, a mesmerizing speaker with
an understated courage who has spent much of her early thirties on the road,
showing ugly slides of oil spills and ravaged landscapes and describing the silent
war the oil and gas industry is waging on her people, the Lubicon Lake First
Nation. “People are listening now,” she told me, with tears in her eyes in the
summer of 2013. “But it took a long time for people to get to that place.” And
this, she said, means that “there is hope. But it can be pretty dire sometimes in
Alberta.”63
What is clear is that fighting a giant extractive industry on your own can
seem impossible, especially in a remote, sparsely populated location. But being
part of a continent-wide, even global, movement that has the industry
surrounded is a very different story.
This networking and cross-pollinating is usually invisible—it’s a mood, an
energy that spreads from place to place. But for a brief time in September 2013,
Blockadia’s web of inspiration was made visible. Five carvers from the Lummi
Nation in Washington State—the coastal tribe that is leading the fight against
the largest proposed coal export terminal on a contested piece of the West
Coast—showed up in Otter Creek, Montana. They had traveled roughly 1,300
kilometers from their home territory of mountainous temperate rainforest and
craggy Pacific beaches to southeastern Montana’s parched grasses and gentle
hills, carrying with them a twenty-two-foot cedar totem pole, strapped to a
flatbed truck. Otter Creek is the site of a planned massive coal mine and the
Lummi visitors stood on that spot, which until recently had been written off as
doomed, with more than a hundred people from the nearby Northern Cheyenne
Reservation, as well as a group of local cattle ranchers. Together, they explored
the ways in which they had been brought together by the ambitions of the
carbon frenzy.
If the Otter Creek mine were built in the Powder River Basin, it would
compromise the water and air for the ranchers and the Northern Cheyenne, and
the railway transporting the coal to the west coast could disturb the Cheyenne’s

ancient burial grounds. The export port, meanwhile, was set to be built on one
of the Lummi’s ancient burial grounds, and the coal would then be carried on
barges that would disrupt their fishing areas and potentially threaten many
livelihoods.
The group stood in the valley by the banks of Otter Creek, under a sunny sky
with hawks flying overhead, and blessed the totem pole with pipe smoke,
vowing to fight together to keep the coal under their feet in the ground, and to
keep both the railway and port from being built. The Lummi carvers then
strapped the totem pole—which they had named Kwel hoy’ or “We Draw the
Line”—back onto the truck and took it on a sixteen-day journey to eight other
communities, all of whom found themselves in the path of coal trains, big rigs,
or tar sands pipelines and oil tankers. There were ceremonies at every stop, as
the visitors and their hosts—both Native and non-Native—together drew
connections among their various local battles against the extractive industries.
The journey ended on Tsleil-Waututh land in North Vancouver, a pivotal
community in the fight against increased oil tanker traffic. There the totem pole
was permanently planted, looking out at the Pacific.
While in Montana, Lummi master carver Jewell Praying Wolf James
explained the purpose of the long journey: “We’re concerned about protecting
the environment as well as people’s health all the way from the Powder River to
the West Coast. . . . We’re traveling across the country to help unify people’s
voices. It doesn’t matter who you are, where you are at or what race you are—
red, black, white or yellow—we’re all in this together.”64
This kind of alliance building among the various outposts of Blockadia has
proven the movement’s critics wrong time and time again. When the campaign
against the Keystone XL pipeline began to gather momentum, several highprofile pundits insisted that it was all a waste of valuable time and energy. The
oil would get out through another route regardless, and in the grand scheme of
things the carbon it would carry represented little more than “a rounding error,”
as Jonathan Chait wrote in New York magazine. Better, they argued, to fight for
a carbon tax, or for stronger EPA regulations, or for a reincarnation of cap-andtrade. New York Times columnist Joe Nocera went so far as to call the strategy
“utterly boneheaded,” and accused James Hansen, whose congressional
testimony launched the modern climate movement, of “hurting the very cause
he claims to care so much about.”65

What we now know is that Keystone was always about much more than a
pipeline. It was a new fighting spirit, and one that is contagious. One battle
doesn’t rob from another but rather causes battles to multiply, with each act of
courage, and each victory, inspiring others to strengthen their resolve.

The BP Factor: No Trust
Beyond the fossil fuel industry’s pace of expansion, and its forays into hostile
territory, something else has propelled this movement forward in recent years.
That is the widespread conviction that today’s extractive activities are
significantly higher risk than their predecessors: tar sands oil is unquestionably
more disruptive and damaging to local ecosystems than conventional crude.
Many believe it to be more dangerous to transport, and once spilled harder to
clean up. A similar risk escalation is present in the shift to fracked oil and gas;
in the shift from shallow to deepwater drilling (as the BP disaster showed); and
most dramatically, in the move from warm water to Arctic drilling.
Communities in the path of unconventional energy projects are convinced they
are being asked to risk a hell of a lot, and much of the time they are being
offered very little in return for their sacrifice, whether lasting jobs or significant
royalties.
Industry and government, for their part, have been extremely reluctant to
acknowledge, let alone act upon, the stepped-up risks of extreme energy. For
years, rail companies and officials have largely treated fracked oil from the
Bakken as if it were the same as conventional crude—never mind the mounting
evidence that it is significantly more volatile. (After announcing some mostly
voluntary new safety measures beginning in early 2014 that were generally
deemed inadequate, U.S. regulators claim to be in the process of developing a
variety of tougher rules for oil-by-rail transport.)66
Similarly, government and industry are pushing the vast expansion of
pipelines carrying oil from the Alberta tar sands despite a paucity of reliable,
peer-reviewed research assessing whether dilbit, as diluted bitumen is called, is
more prone to spill than conventional oil. But there is good reason for concern.
As a joint 2011 report published by the Natural Resources Defense Council, the
Sierra Club, and others notes, “There are many indications that dilbit is
significantly more corrosive to pipeline systems than conventional crude. For
example, the Alberta pipeline system has had approximately sixteen times as

many spills due to internal corrosion as the U.S. system. Yet, the safety and spill
response standards used by the United States to regulate pipeline transport of
bitumen are designed for conventional oil.”67
Meanwhile, there are huge gaps in our knowledge about how spilled tar sands
oil behaves in water. Over the last decade, there have been few studies
published on the subject, and almost all were commissioned by the oil industry.
However, a recent investigation by Environment Canada contained several
disturbing findings, including that diluted tar sands oil sinks in saltwater “when
battered by waves and mixed with sediments” (rather than floating on the ocean
surface where it can be partially recovered) and that dispersants like those used
during BP’s Deepwater Horizon disaster have only “a limited effect,” according
to a report in The Globe and Mail. And there has been virtually no formal
research at all on the particular risks of transporting tar sands oil via truck or
rail.68
Similarly, large knowledge gaps exist in our understanding of the ecological
and human health impact of the Alberta tar sands themselves, with their
enormous open-pit mines, dump trucks that can reach up to five stories high,
and roaring upgraders. In huge swaths of country surrounding Fort McMurray,
ground zero of Canada’s bitumen boom, the boreal forest—once a verdant,
spongy bog—has been sucked dry of life. Every few minutes, the rancid air is
punctured by the sound of booming cannons, meant to keep migrating birds
from landing on the strange liquid silver surface of the huge tailing ponds.III69 In
Alberta the centuries-old war to control nature is not a metaphor; it is a very
real war, complete with artillery.
The oil companies, of course, say that they are using the safest methods of
environmental protection; that the vast tailings ponds are secure; that water is
still safe to drink (though workers stick to bottled); that the land will soon be
“reclaimed” and returned to moose and black bears (if any are still around). And
despite years of complaints from First Nations communities like the Athabasca
Chipewyan, situated downstream from the mines along the Athabasca River,
industry and government continued to insist that whatever organic
contaminants are found in the river are “naturally occurring”—this is an oil-rich
region after all.
To anyone who has witnessed the scale of the tar sands operation, the
assurances seem implausible. The government has yet to establish a genuinely
independent, comprehensive system for monitoring mining impacts on the
surrounding watersheds—in an industrial project whose total worth is

approaching $500 billion. After it announced a flashy new federal-provincial
monitoring program in 2012, the PR effort quickly spiraled out of its control.
Referring to new findings from government and independent researchers, Bill
Donahue, an environmental scientist with an advisory role in the program, said
in February 2014 that “not only are those tailings ponds leaking, but it looks like
it is flowing pretty much from those tailings ponds, through the ground and into
the Athabasca River.” He added: “So, there goes . . . that message we’ve been
hearing about. ‘These tailings ponds are safe, they don’t leak,’ and so on.” In a
separate incident, a team of government scientists with Environment Canada
corroborated outside research on widespread contamination of snow around tar
sands operations, though the Harper administration did its best to keep the
researchers from speaking to the press.70
And there are still no comprehensive studies on the impacts of this pollution
on human health. On the contrary, some who have chosen to speak out have
faced severe reprisals. Most notable had been the experience of John O’Connor,
a gentle, gray-bearded family doctor who still speaks with an accent from his
native Ireland. In 2003, O’Connor began to report that, while treating patients
in Fort Chipewyan, he was coming across alarming numbers of cancers,
including extremely rare and aggressive bile-duct malignancies. He quickly
found himself under fire from federal health regulators, who filed several
misconduct charges against him with the College of Physicians and Surgeons of
Alberta (including raising “undue alarm”). “I don’t know, personally, of any
situation where a doctor has had to go through what I’ve gone through,”
O’Connor has said of the reputational smears and the years spent fighting the
allegations. He was, eventually, cleared of all charges and a subsequent
investigation of cancer rates vindicated several of his warnings.71
But before that happened the message to other doctors was sent: a report
commissioned by the Alberta Energy Regulator recently found a “marked
reluctance to speak out” in the medical community about the health impact of
the tar sands, with several interviewees pointing to Dr. O’Connor’s experience.
(“Physicians are quite frankly afraid to diagnose health conditions linked to the
oil and gas industry,” concluded the toxicologist who authored the report.) It
has become routine, moreover, for the federal government to prevent senior
environmental and climate scientists from speaking to journalists about any
environmentally sensitive subjects. (“I’m available when media relations says
I’m available,” as one scientist told Postmedia.)72

And this is just one facet of what has become known as Prime Minister
Stephen Harper’s “war on science,” with environmental monitoring budgets
relentlessly slashed, covering everything from oil spills and industrial air
pollution to the broader impacts of climate change. Since 2008, more than two
thousand scientists have lost their jobs as a result of the cuts.73
This is, of course, a strategy. Only by systematically failing to conduct basic
research, and silencing experts who are properly tasked to investigate health and
environmental concerns, can industry and government continue to make
absurdly upbeat claims about how all is under control in the oil patch.IV74
A similar willful blindness pervades the rapid spread of hydraulic fracking.
For years the U.S. gas industry responded to reports of contaminated water wells
by insisting that there was no scientific proof of any connection between
fracking and the fact that residents living near gas drilling suddenly found they
could set their tap water on fire. But the reason there was no evidence was
because the industry had won an unprecedented exemption from federal
monitoring and regulation—the so-called Halliburton Loophole, ushered in
under the administration of George W. Bush. The loophole exempted most
fracking from regulations of the Safe Drinking Water Act, helping to ensure
that companies did not have to report any of the chemicals they were injecting
underground to the Environmental Protection Agency, while shielding their use
of the riskiest chemicals from EPA oversight.75 And if no one knows what you
are putting into the ground, it’s tough to make a definitive link when those
toxins start coming out of people’s taps.
And yet as more evidence emerges, it is coming down hard on one side. A
growing body of independent, peer-reviewed studies is building the case that
fracking puts drinking water, including aquifers, at risk. In July 2013, for
instance, a Duke University–led paper analyzed dozens of drinking water wells
in northeastern Pennsylvania’s Marcellus Shale region. The researchers found
that the level of contamination from methane, ethane, and propane closely
correlated with proximity to wells for shale gas. The industry response is that
this is just natural leakage in regions rich in gas (the same line that tar sands
operators in Alberta used when organic pollutants are found in the water there).
But this study found that while methane was present in most of the sampled
water wells, the concentration was six times higher in those within a kilometer of
a gas well. In a study not yet published, the Duke team also analyzed water wells
in Texas that had been previously declared safe. There, they found that contrary

to assurances from government and industry, methane levels in many wells
exceeded the minimum safety level set by the U.S. Geological Survey.76
The links between fracking and small earthquakes are also solidifying. In
2012, a University of Texas research scientist analyzed seismic activity from
November 2009 to September 2011 over part of the huge Barnett Shale region
in Texas, which lies under Fort Worth and parts of Dallas, and found the
epicenters of sixty-seven small earthquakes.77 The most reliably located
earthquakes were within two miles of an injection well. A July 2013 study in the
Journal of Geophysical Research linked fracking-related waste injection to 109
small earthquakes that took place in a single year around Youngstown, Ohio,
where an earthquake had not been previously recorded since monitoring began
in the eighteenth century. The lead researcher of a similar study, published in
Science, explained, “The fluids [in wastewater injection wells] are driving the
faults to their tipping point.”78
All of this illustrates what is so unsettling about unconventional extraction
methods. Conventional oil and gas drilling, as well as underground coal mining,
are destructive, to be sure. But comparatively speaking, they are the fossil fuel
equivalent of the surgeon’s scalpel—the carbon is extracted with relatively small
incisions. But extreme, or unconventional extraction takes a sledgehammer to
the whole vicinity. When the sledgehammer strikes the surface of the land—as
in the case of mountaintop coal removal and open-pit tar sands—the violence
can be seen with the naked eye. But with fracking, deepwater drilling, and
underground (“in situ”) tar sands extraction, the sledgehammer aims deep
underground. At first this can seem more benign, since the impacts are less
visible. Yet over and over again, we are catching glimpses of how badly we are
breaking critical parts of our ecosystems that our best experts have no idea how
to fix.

Educated by Disaster
In Blockadia outposts around the world, the initials “BP” act as a kind of mantra
or invocation—shorthand for: whatever you do, take no extractive company at
its word. The initials mean that passivity and trust in the face of assurances
about world-class technology and cutting-edge safety measures are recipes for
flammable water in your faucet, an oil slick in your backyard, or a train
explosion down the street.

Indeed, many Blockadia activists cite the 2010 BP disaster in the Gulf of
Mexico as either their political awakening, or the moment they realized they
absolutely had to win their various battles against extreme energy. The facts of
that case are familiar but bear repeating. In what became the largest accidental
marine oil spill in history, a state-of-the-art offshore oil rig exploded, killing
eleven workers, while oil gushed from the ruptured Macondo wellhead about
one and a half kilometers below the surface. What made the strongest
impression on the horrified public was not the tar-coated tourist beaches in
Florida or the oil-soaked pelicans in Louisiana. It was the harrowing
combination of the oil giant’s complete lack of preparedness for a blowout at
those depths, as it scrambled for failed fix after failed fix, and the cluelessness of
the government regulators and responders. Not only had regulators taken BP at
its word about the supposed safety of the operation, but government agencies
were so ill-equipped to deal with the scale of the disaster that they allowed BP—
the perpetrator—to be in charge of the cleanup. As the world watched, the
experts were clearly making it up as they went along.
The investigations and lawsuits that followed revealed that a desire to save
money had played an important role in creating the conditions for the accident.
For instance, as Washington raced to reestablish lost credibility, an
investigation by a U.S. Interior Department agency found “BP’s cost or time
saving decisions without considering contingencies and mitigation were
contributing causes of the Macondo blowout.” A report from the specially
created Presidential Oil Spill Commission similarly found, “Whether purposeful
or not, many of the decisions that BP, [and its contractors] Halliburton and
Transocean, made that increased the risk of the Macondo blowout clearly saved
those companies significant time (and money).” Jackie Savitz, a marine scientist
and a vice president at the conservation group Oceana, was more direct: BP “put
profits before precautions. They let dollar signs drive a culture of risk-taking that
led to this unacceptable outcome.”79
And any notion that this was a problem unique to BP was quickly dispelled
when—only ten days after crews stopped the gush of oil into the Gulf of Mexico
—an Enbridge pipeline burst in Michigan, causing the largest onshore oil spill
in U.S. history. The pipe ruptured in a tributary of the Kalamazoo River and
quickly contaminated more than fifty-five kilometers of waterways and wetlands
with over one million gallons of oil, which left swans, muskrats, and turtles
coated in black gunk. Homes were evacuated, local residents sickened, and

onlookers watched “an alarming brown mist rise as river water the shade of a
dark chocolate malt tumbled” over a local dam, according to one report.80
Like BP, it seemed that Enbridge had put profits before basic safety, while
regulators slept at the switch. For instance, it turned out that Enbridge had
known as early as 2005 that the section of pipeline that failed was corroding,
and by 2009 the company had identified 329 other defects in the line stretching
through southern Michigan that were serious enough to require immediate
repair under federal rules. The $40 billion company was granted an extension,
and applied for a second one just ten days before the rupture—the same day an
Enbridge VP told Congress that the company could mount an “almost
instantaneous” response to a leak. In fact it took them seventeen hours to close
the valve on the leaking pipeline. Three years after the initial disaster, about
180,000 gallons of oil were still sitting on the bottom of the Kalamazoo.81
As in the Gulf, where BP had been drilling at depths unheard of just a few
years earlier, the Kalamazoo disaster was also linked to the new era of extreme,
higher-risk fossil fuel extraction. It took a while, however, before that became
clear. For more than a week Enbridge did not share with the public the very
pertinent fact that the substance that had leaked was not conventional crude; it
was diluted bitumen, piped from the Alberta tar sands through Michigan. In fact
in the early days, Enbridge’s then CEO, Patrick Daniel, flatly denied that the oil
came from the tar sands and was later forced to backtrack. “What I indicated is
that it was not what we have traditionally referred to as tar sands oil,” Daniel
claimed of bitumen that certainly had come from the tar sands. “If it is part of
the same geological formation, then I bow to that expert opinion.”82
In the fall of 2010, with many of these disasters still under way, Marty
Cobenais of the Indigenous Environmental Network told me that the summer of
spills was having a huge impact on communities in the path of new
infrastructure projects, whether big rigs, pipelines, or tankers. “The oil industry
always says there is 0 percent chance of their oil hitting the shores, but with BP,
we saw that it did. Their projections are always wrong,” he said, adding, “They
are always talking about ‘fail-proof’ but with Kalamazoo we saw they couldn’t
turn it off for hours.”83
In other words, a great many people are no longer believing what the
industry experts tell them; they are believing what they see. And over the last
few years we have all seen a whole lot. Unforgettable images from the bizarre
underwater “spill-cam” showing BP’s oil gushing for three long months into the
Gulf merge seamlessly with shocking footage of methane-laced tap water being

set on fire in fracking country, which in turn meld with the grief of Quebec’s
Lac-Mégantic after the horrific train explosion, with family members searching
through the rubble for signs of their loved ones, which in turn fade to memories
of 300,000 people in West Virginia being told they could not drink or bathe in
their tap water for up to ten days after it had been contaminated by chemicals
used in coal mining. And then there was the spectacle in 2012 of Shell’s first
foray into the highest-risk gambit of all: Arctic drilling. Highlights included one
of Shell’s giant drill rigs breaking free from its tow and running aground on the
coast of Sitkalidak Island; another rig slipping its anchorage; and an oil spill
containment dome being “crushed like a beer can,” according to a U.S. Bureau
of Safety and Environmental Enforcement official.84
If it seems like there are more such spills and accidents than before, that’s
because there are. According to a months-long investigation by EnergyWire, in
2012 there were more than six thousand spills and “other mishaps” at onshore
oil and gas sites in the U.S. “That’s an average of more than 16 spills a day. And
it’s a significant increase since 2010. In the 12 states where comparable data
were available, spills were up about 17 percent.” There is also evidence that
companies are doing a poorer job of cleaning up their messes: in an
investigation of pipeline leaks of hazardous liquids (mostly petroleum-related),
The New York Times found that in 2005 and 2006 pipeline operators reported
“recovering more than 60 percent of liquids spilled”; between 2007 and 2010
“operators recovered less than a third.”85
It’s not just the engineering failures that are feeding widespread mistrust. As
with BP and Enbridge, it’s the constant stream of revelations about the role that
greed—fully liberated by lax regulation and monitoring—seems to have played
in stacking the deck. For example, Shell’s Arctic rig ran aground when it braved
fierce weather in an apparent attempt by the company to get out of Alaska in
time to avoid paying additional taxes in the state.86
And Montreal, Maine & Atlantic (MM&A), the rail company behind the
Lac-Mégantic disaster, had received, one year before the accident, government
permission to cut the number of staff on its trains to a single engineer. Until the
1980s, trains like the one that derailed were generally staffed by five employees,
all sharing the duties of operating safely. Now it’s down to two—but for
MM&A, that was still too much. According to one of the company’s former
railway workers, “It was all about cutting, cutting, cutting.” Compounding these
risks, according to a four-month Globe and Mail investigation, “companies often
don’t test their oil shipments for explosiveness before sending the trains.” Little

wonder then that within a year of Lac-Mégantic, several more oil-laden trains
went up in flames, including one in Casselton, North Dakota, one outside a
village in northwest New Brunswick, and one in downtown Lynchburg,
Virginia.87
In a sane world, this cluster of disasters, layered on top of the larger climate
crisis, would have prompted significant political change. Caps and moratoriums
would have been issued, and the shift away from extreme energy would have
begun. The fact that nothing of the sort has happened, and that permits and
leases are still being handed out for ever more dangerous extractive activities, is
at least partly due to old-fashioned corruption—of both the legal and illegal
varieties.
A particularly lurid episode was revealed a year and a half before the BP
disaster. An internal U.S. government report pronounced that what was then
called the Minerals Management Service—the division of the U.S. Interior
Department charged with collecting royalty payments from the oil and gas
industry—suffered from “a culture of ethical failure.” Not only had officials
repeatedly accepted gifts from oil industry employees but, according to a report
by the department’s inspector general, several officials “frequently consumed
alcohol at industry functions, had used cocaine and marijuana, and had sexual
relationships with oil and gas company representatives.” For a public that had
long suspected that their public servants were in bed with the oil and gas lobby,
this was pretty graphic proof.88
Little wonder, then, that a 2013 Harris poll found that a paltry 4 percent of
U.S. respondents believe oil companies are “honest and trustworthy” (only the
tobacco industry fared worse). That same year, Gallup polled Americans about
their opinions of twenty-five industries, including banking and government. No
industry was more disliked than the oil and gas sector. A 2012 poll in Canada,
meanwhile, asked Canadians to rate each of eleven groups on their
trustworthiness on “energy issues.” Oil and gas firms and energy executives took
the bottom two slots, well below academics (the most trusted group), as well as
environmental and community groups (which also rated positively). And in an
EU-wide survey that same year, participants were polled on their impressions of
eleven different sectors and asked if they “make efforts to behave responsibly
towards society”—along with finance and banking, mining and oil and gas
companies again came in last place.89
Hard realities like these have posed a challenge to the highly paid spin
doctors employed by the extractive industries, the ones who had grown

accustomed to being able to gloss over pretty much any controversy with sleek
advertising showing blond children running through fields and multiracial
actors in lab coats expressing concern about the environment. These days that
doesn’t cut it. No matter how many millions are spent on advertising campaigns
touting the modernity of the tar sands or the cleanliness of natural gas, it’s clear
that a great many people are no longer being persuaded. And those proving
most resistant are the ones whose opinions matter most: the people living on
lands that the extractive companies need to access in order to keep their
astronomical profits flowing.

The Return of Precaution
For decades, the environmental movement spoke the borrowed language of risk
assessment, diligently working with partners in business and government to
balance dangerous levels of pollution against the need for profit and economic
growth. These assumptions about acceptable levels of risk were taken so deeply
for granted that they formed the basis of the official climate change discussion.
Action necessary to save humanity from the very real risk of climate chaos was
coolly balanced against the risk such action would pose to GDPs, as if economic
growth still has a meaning on a planet convulsing in serial disasters.
But in Blockadia, risk assessment has been abandoned on the barricaded
roadside, replaced by a resurgence of the precautionary principle—which holds
that when human health and the environment are significantly at risk, perfect
scientific certainty is not required before taking action. Moreover the burden of
proving that a practice is safe should not be placed on the public that could be
harmed.
Blockadia is turning the tables, insisting that it is up to industry to prove that
its methods are safe—and in the era of extreme energy that is something that
simply cannot be done. To quote the biologist Sandra Steingraber, “Can you
provide an example of an ecosystem on which was laid down a barrage of
poisons, and terrible and unexpected consequences for human beings were not
the result?”90
The fossil fuel companies, in short, are no longer dealing with those Big
Green groups that can be silenced with a generous donation or a conscienceclearing carbon offset program. The communities they are facing are, for the
most part, not looking to negotiate a better deal—whether in the form of local

jobs, higher royalties, or better safety standards. More and more, these
communities are simply saying “No.” No to the pipeline. No to Arctic drilling.
No to the coal and oil trains. No to the heavy hauls. No to the export terminal.
No to fracking. And not just “Not in My Backyard” but, as the French antifracking activists say: Ni ici, ni ailleurs—neither here, nor elsewhere. In other
words: no new carbon frontiers.
Indeed the trusty slur NIMBY has completely lost its bite. As Wendell Berry
says, borrowing words from E. M. Forster, conservation “turns on affection”—
and if each of us loved our homeplace enough to defend it, there would be no
ecological crisis, no place could ever be written off as a sacrifice zone.91 We
would simply have no choice but to adopt nonpoisonous methods of meeting
our needs.
This sense of moral clarity, after so many decades of chummy green
partnerships, is the real shock for the extractive industries. The climate
movement has found its nonnegotiables. This fortitude is not just building a
large and militant resistance to the companies most responsible for the climate
crisis. As we will see in the next chapter, it is also delivering some of the most
significant victories the environmental movement has seen in decades.

I. The villagers insist their struggle is committed to nonviolence and blame outsiders or even
provocateurs for the arson.
II. Maxime Combes, a French economist and anti-fracking activist, observes, “The scene in the film
where landowner Mike Markham ignites gas from a water faucet in his home with a cigarette lighter due to
natural gas exploration in the area has had a far greater impact against fracking than any report or speech.”
III. In 2008, 1,600 ducks died after they landed in these dangerous waters during a storm; another
incident led to the deaths of over five hundred more two years later. (A biologist investigating the later
incident for the Alberta government explained that it was not industry’s fault that the ducks were forced to
land during a violent storm—then pointed out, without apparent irony, that such storms will become more
frequent as a result of climate change.)
IV. And their claims are indeed absurd: according to an independent study published in 2014 in the
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, for example, emissions of potentially toxic pollutants from
the tar sands “are two to three orders-of-magnitude larger than those reported” by companies to their
regulators. The discrepancy is evident in actual measurements of these pollutants in the air near tar sands
activities. The study’s coauthor, Frank Wania, an environmental scientist at the University of Toronto,
described the official estimates as “inadequate and incomplete” and made the commonsense observation,
“Only with a complete and accurate account of the emissions is it actually possible to make a meaningful
assessment of the environmental impact and of the risk to human health.”

10

LOVE WILL SAVE THIS PLACE
Democracy, Divestment, and the Wins So Far
“I believe that the more clearly we can focus our attention on the wonders and realities of
the universe about us, the less taste we shall have for destruction.”
—Rachel Carson, 19541

“What good is a mountain just to have a mountain?”
—Jason Bostic, Vice President of the West Virginia Coal Association, 20112

On a drizzly British Columbia day in April 2012, a twenty-seven-seat turboprop
plane landed at the Bella Bella airport, which consists of a single landing strip
leading to a clapboard building. The passengers descending from the blue-andwhite Pacific Coastal aircraft included the three members of a review panel
created by the Canadian government. They had made the 480-kilometer
journey from Vancouver to this remote island community, a place of deep fjords
and lush evergreen forests reaching to the sea, to hold public hearings about one
of the most contentious new pieces of fossil fuel infrastructure in North
America: Enbridge’s proposed Northern Gateway pipeline.
Bella Bella is not directly on the oil pipeline’s route (that is 200 kilometers
even further north). However, the Pacific ocean waters that are its front yard
are in the treacherous path of the oil tankers that the pipeline would load up
with diluted tar sands oil—up to 75 percent more oil in some supertankers than
the Exxon Valdez was carrying in 1989 when it spilled in Alaska’s Prince
William Sound, devastating marine life and fisheries across the region.3 A spill
in these waters could be even more damaging, since the remoteness would likely
make reaching an accident site difficult, especially during winter storms.

The appointed members of the Joint Review Panel—one woman and two
men, aided by support staff—had been holding hearings about the pipeline
impacts for months now and would eventually present the federal government
with their recommendation on whether the project should go ahead. Bella
Bella, whose population is roughly 90 percent Heiltsuk First Nation, was more
than ready for them.
A line of Heiltsuk hereditary chiefs waited on the tarmac, all dressed in their
full regalia: robes embroidered with eagles, salmon, orcas, and other creatures of
these seas and skies; headdresses adorned with animal masks and long trails of
white ermine fur, as well as woven cedar basket hats. They greeted the visitors
with a welcome dance, noisemakers shaking in their hands and rattling from the
aprons of their robes, while a line of drummers and singers backed them up. On
the other side of the chain link fence was a large crowd of demonstrators
carrying anti-pipeline signs and canoe paddles.
Standing a respectful half step behind the chiefs was Jess Housty, a slight
twenty-five-year-old woman who had helped to galvanize the community’s
engagement with the panel (and would soon be elected to the Heiltsuk Tribal
Council as its youngest member). An accomplished poet who created Bella
Bella’s first and only library while she was still a teenager, Housty described the
scene at the airport as “the culmination of a huge planning effort driven by our
whole community.”4
And it was young people who had led the way, turning the local school into
a hub of organizing. Students had worked for months in preparation for the
hearings. They researched the history of pipeline and tanker spills, including the
2010 disaster on the Kalamazoo River, noting that Enbridge, the company
responsible, was the same one pushing the Northern Gateway pipeline. The
teens were also keenly interested in the Exxon Valdez disaster since it took place
in a northern landscape similar to their own. As a community built around
fishing and other ocean harvesting, they were alarmed to learn about how the
salmon of Prince William Sound had become sick in the years after the spill,
and how herring stocks had completely collapsed (they are still not fully
recovered, more than two decades later).
The students contemplated what such a spill would mean on their coast. If
the sockeye salmon, a keystone species, were threatened, it would have a
cascade effect—since they feed the killer whales and white-sided dolphins
whose dorsal fins regularly pierce the water’s surface in nearby bays, as well as
the seals and sea lions that bark and sunbathe on the rocky outcroppings. And

when the fish return to the freshwater rivers and streams to spawn, they feed the
eagles, the black bears, the grizzlies, and the wolves, whose waste then provides
the nutrients to the lichen that line the streams and riverbanks, as well as to the
great cedars and Douglas firs that tower over the temperate rainforest. It’s the
salmon that connect the streams to the rivers, the river to the sea, the sea back
to the forests. Endanger salmon and you endanger the entire ecosystem that
depends on them, including the Heiltsuk people whose ancient culture and
modern livelihood is inseparable from this intricate web of life.
Bella Bella’s students wrote essays on these themes, prepared to present
testimony, and painted signs to greet the panel members. Some went on a fortyeight-hour hunger strike to dramatize the stakes of losing their food source.
Teachers observed that no issue had ever engaged the community’s young
people like this—some even noticed a decline in depression and drug use. That’s
a very big deal in a place that not long ago suffered from a youth suicide
epidemic, the legacy of scarring colonial policies, including generations of
children—the great-grandparents, grandparents, and sometimes the parents of
today’s teens and young adults—being taken from their families and placed in
church-run residential schools where abuse was rampant.
Housty recalls, “As I stood behind our chiefs [on the tarmac], I remember
thinking how the community had grown around the issue from the first moment
we heard rumblings around Enbridge Northern Gateway. The momentum had
built and it was strong. As a community, we were prepared to stand up with
dignity and integrity to be witnesses for the lands and waters that sustained our
ancestors—that sustain us—that we believe should sustain our future
generations.”
After the dance, the panel members ducked into a white minivan that took
them on the five-minute drive into town. The road was lined with hundreds of
residents, including many children, holding their handmade poster-board signs.
“Oil Is Death,” “We Have the Moral Right to Say No,” “Keep Our Oceans
Blue,” “Our Way of Life Cannot Be Bought!,” “I Can’t Drink Oil.” Some held
drawings of orcas, salmon, even kelp. Many of the signs simply said: “No
Tankers.” One man thought the panel members weren’t bothering to look out
the window, so he thumped the side of the van as it passed and held his sign up
to the glass.
By some counts, a third of Bella Bella’s 1,095 residents were on the street
that day, one of the largest demonstrations in the community’s history.5 Others
participated in different ways: by harvesting and preparing food for the evening

feast, where the panel members were to be honored guests. It was part of the
Heiltsuk’s tradition of hospitality but it was also a way to show the visitors the
foods that would be at risk if just one of those supertankers were to run into
trouble. Salmon, herring roe, halibut, oolichan, crab, and prawns were all on the
menu.
Similar scenes had played out everywhere the panel traveled in British
Columbia: cities and towns came out in droves, voicing unanimous or near
unanimous opposition to the project. Usually First Nations were front and
center, reflecting the fact that the province is home to what is arguably the most
powerful Indigenous land rights movement in North America, evidenced by the
fact that roughly 80 percent of its land remains “unceded,” which means that it
has never been relinquished under any treaty nor has it ever been claimed by
the Canadian state through an act of war.6
Yet there was clearly something about the passion of Bella Bella’s greeting
that unnerved the panel members. The visitors refused the invitation to the
feast that evening, and Chief Councilor Marilyn Slett was put in the unenviable
position of having to take the microphone and share a letter she had just
received from the Joint Review Panel. It stated that the pipeline hearings for
which the assembled crowd had all been preparing for months were canceled.
Apparently the demonstration on the way from the airport had made the
visitors feel unsafe and, the letter stated, “The Panel cannot be in a situation
where it is unsure that the crowd will be peaceful.” It later emerged that the
sound of that single man thumping the side of the van had somehow been
mistaken for gunfire. (Police in attendance asserted that the demonstrations had
been nonviolent and that there was never any security threat.)7
Housty said the news of the cancellation had a “physical impact. We had
done everything according to our teachings, and to feel the back of someone’s
hand could hardly have been more of an insult.” In the end, the hearings went
ahead but a day and a half of promised meeting time was lost, depriving many
community members of their hope of being heard in person.I8
What shocked many of Bella Bella’s residents was not just the weird and false
accusation of violence; it was the extent to which the entire spirit of their
actions seemed to have been misunderstood. When the panel members looked
out the van window, they evidently saw little more than a stereotypical mob of
angry Indians, wanting to vent their hatred on anyone associated with the
pipeline. But to the people on the other side of the glass, holding their paddles
and fish paintings, the demonstration had not primarily been about anger or

hatred. It had been about love—a collective and deeply felt expression of love
for their breathtaking part of the world.
As the young people of this community explained when they finally got the
chance, their health and identity were inextricably bound up in their ability to
follow in the footsteps of their forebears—fishing and paddling in the same
waters, collecting kelp in the same tidal zones in the outer coastal islands,
hunting in the same forests, and collecting medicines in the same meadows.
Which is why Northern Gateway was seen not simply as a threat to the local
fishery but as the possible undoing of all this intergenerational healing work.
And therefore as another wave of colonial violence.
When Jess Housty testified before the Enbridge Gateway review panel (she
had to travel for a full day to Terrace, British Columbia to do it), she put this in
unequivocal terms.
When my children are born, I want them to be born into a world where
hope and transformation are possible. I want them to be born into a world
where stories still have power. I want them to grow up able to be Heiltsuk
in every sense of the word. To practice the customs and understand the
identity that has made our people strong for hundreds of generations.
That cannot happen if we do not sustain the integrity of our territory,
the lands and waters, and the stewardship practices that link our people to
the landscape. On behalf of the young people in my community, I
respectfully disagree with the notion that there is any compensation to be
made for the loss of our identity, for the loss of our right to be Heiltsuk.9
The power of this ferocious love is what the resource companies and their
advocates in government inevitably underestimate, precisely because no amount
of money can extinguish it. When what is being fought for is an identity, a
culture, a beloved place that people are determined to pass on to their
grandchildren, and that their ancestors may have paid for with great sacrifice,
there is nothing companies can offer as a bargaining chip. No safety pledge will
assuage; no bribe will be big enough. And though this kind of connection to
place is surely strongest in Indigenous communities where the ties to the land go
back thousands of years, it is in fact Blockadia’s defining feature.
I saw it shine brightly in Halkidiki, Greece, in the struggle against the gold
mine. There, a young mother named Melachrini Liakou—one of the
movement’s most tireless leaders—told me with unswerving confidence that the

difference between the way she saw the land, as a fourth-generation farmer, and
the way the mining company saw the same patch of earth, was that, “I am a part
of the land. I respect it, I love it and I don’t treat it as a useless object, as if I
want to take something out of it and then the rest will be waste. Because I want
to live here this year, next year, and to hand it down to the generations to
come. In contrast, Eldorado, and any other mining company, they want to
devour the land, to plunder it, to take away what is most precious for
themselves.”10 And then they would leave behind, she said, “a huge chemical
bomb for all mankind and nature.”
Alexis Bonogofsky (who had told me what a “huge mistake” the oil
companies made in trying to bring their big rigs along Highway 12) speaks in
similar terms about the fight to protect southeastern Montana from mining
companies like Arch Coal. But for Bonogofsky, a thirty-three-year-old goat
rancher and environmentalist who does yoga in her spare time, it’s less about
farming than deer hunting. “It sounds ridiculous but there’s this one spot where
I can sit on the sandstone rock and you know that the mule deer are coming up
and migrating through, you just watch these huge herds come through, and you
know that they’ve been doing that for thousands and thousands of years. And
you sit there and you feel connected to that. And sometimes it’s almost like you
can feel the earth breathe.” She adds: “That connection to this place and the
love that people have for it, that’s what Arch Coal doesn’t get. They
underestimate that. They don’t understand it so they disregard it. And that’s
what in the end will save that place. Is not the hatred of the coal companies, or
anger, but love will save that place.”11
This is also what makes Blockadia conflicts so intensely polarized. Because
the culture of fossil fuel extraction is—by both necessity and design—one of
extreme rootlessness. The workforce of big rig drivers, pipefitters, miners, and
engineers is, on the whole, highly mobile, moving from one worksite to the next
and very often living in the now notorious “man camps”—self-enclosed armybase-style mobile communities that serve every need from gyms to movie
theaters (often with an underground economy in prostitution).
Even in places like Gillette, Wyoming, or Fort McMurray, Alberta, where
extractive workers may stay for decades and raise their kids, the culture remains
one of transience. Almost invariably, workers plan to leave these blighted places
as soon as they have saved enough money—enough to pay off student loans, to
buy a house for their families back home, or, for the really big dreamers, enough
to retire. And with so few well-paying blue-collar jobs left, these extraction jobs

are often the only route out of debt and poverty. It’s telling that tar sands
workers often discuss their time in northern Alberta as if it were less a job than
a highly lucrative jail term: there’s “the three-year plan” (save $200,000, then
leave); “the five-year-plan” (put away half a million); “the ten-year-plan” (make
a million and retire at thirty-five). Whatever the details (and however
unrealistic, given how much money disappears in the city’s notorious party
scene), the plan is always pretty much the same: tough it out in Fort Mac (or
Fort McMoney as it is often called), then get the hell out and begin your real
life. In one survey, 98 percent of respondents in the tar sands area said they
planned to retire somewhere else.12
There is a real sadness to many of these choices: beneath the bravado of the
bar scene are sky-high divorce rates due to prolonged separations and intense
work stress, soaring levels of addiction, and a great many people wishing to be
anywhere but where they are. This kind of disassociation is part of what makes it
possible for decent people to inflict the scale of damage to the land that extreme
energy demands. A coalfield worker in Gillette, Wyoming, for instance, told me
that to get through his workdays, he had trained himself to think of the Powder
River Basin as “another planet.”13 (The moonscape left behind by strip mining
no doubt made this mental trick easier).
These are perfectly understandable survival strategies—but when the
extractive industry’s culture of structural transience bumps up against a group of
deeply rooted people with an intense love of their homeplace and a
determination to protect it, the effect can be explosive.

Love and Water
When these very different worlds collide, one of the things that seems to
happen is that, as in Bella Bella, communities begin to cherish what they have
—and what they stand to lose—even more than before the extractive threat
arrived. This is particularly striking because many of the people waging the
fiercest anti-extraction battles are, at least by traditional measures, poor. But
they are still determined to defend a richness that our economy has not figured
out how to count. “Our kitchens are filled with homemade jams and preserves,
sacks of nuts, crates of honey and cheese, all produced by us,” Doina Dediu, a
Romanian villager protesting fracking, told a reporter. “We are not even that

poor. Maybe we don’t have money, but we have clean water and we are healthy
and we just want to be left alone.”14
So often these battles seem to come to this stark choice: water vs. gas. Water
vs. oil. Water vs. coal. In fact, what has emerged in the movement against
extreme extraction is less an anti–fossil fuels movement than a pro-water
movement.
I was first struck by this in December 2011 when I attended a signing
ceremony for the Save the Fraser Declaration, the historic Indigenous people’s
declaration pledging to prevent the Northern Gateway pipeline and any other
tar sands project of its kind from accessing British Columbia territory. More
than 130 First Nations have signed, along with many nonIndigenous endorsers.
The ceremony was held at the Vancouver Public Library, with several chiefs
present to add their names. Among those addressing the bank of cameras that
day was Marilyn Baptiste, then elected chief of Xeni Gwet’in, one of the
communities of the Tsilhqot’in First Nation. She introduced herself, her people,
and their stake in the fight by naming interconnected bodies of water: “We are
at the headwaters of Chilko, which is one of the largest wild salmon runs, that is
also part of the Taseko, that drains into the Chilko, the Chilko into the
Chilcotin, and into the Fraser. It’s common sense for all of our people to join
together.”15
The point of drawing this liquid map was clear to all present: of course all of
these different nations and groups would join together to fight the threat of an
oil spill—they are all already united by water; by the lakes and rivers, streams
and oceans that drain into one another. And in British Columbia, the living
connection among all of these waterways is the salmon, that remarkably
versatile traveler, which moves through fresh-and saltwater and back again
during its life cycle. That’s why the declaration that was being signed was not
called the “Stop the Tankers and Pipelines Declaration” but rather the “Save
the Fraser Declaration”—the Fraser, at almost 1,400 kilometers, being the
longest river in B.C. and home to its most productive salmon fishery. As the
declaration states: “A threat to the Fraser and its headwaters is a threat to all
who depend on its health. We will not allow our fish, animals, plants, people,
and ways of life to be placed at risk. . . . We will not allow the proposed
Enbridge Northern Gateway Pipelines, or similar Tar Sands projects, to cross
our lands, territories and watersheds, or the ocean migration routes of Fraser
River salmon.”16

If the tar sands pipeline threatens to become an artery of death, carrying
poison across an estimated one thousand waterways, then these interconnected
bodies of water that Chief Baptiste was mapping are arteries of life, flowing
together to bind all of these disparate communities in common purpose.17
The duty to protect water doesn’t just unite opposition to this one pipeline; it
is the animating force behind every single movement fighting extreme
extraction. Whether deepwater drilling, fracking, or mining; whether pipelines,
big rigs, or export terminals, communities are terrified about what these
activities will do to their water systems. This fear is what binds together the
southeastern Montana cattle ranchers with the Northern Cheyenne with the
Washington State communities fighting coal trains and export terminals. Fear
of contaminated drinking water is what kick-started the antifracking movement
(and when a proposal surfaced that would allow the drilling of roughly twenty
thousand fracking wells in the Delaware River Basin—the source of freshwater
for fifteen million Americans—it is what kicked the movement squarely into
the U.S. mainstream).18
The movement against Keystone XL would, similarly, never have resonated
as powerfully as it did had TransCanada not made the inflammatory decision to
route the pipeline through the Ogallala Aquifer—a vast underground source of
freshwater beneath the Great Plains that provides drinking water to
approximately two million people and supplies roughly 30 percent of the
country’s irrigation groundwater.19
In addition to the contamination threats, almost all these extractive projects
also stand out simply for how much water they require. For instance, it takes 2.3
barrels of water to produce a single barrel of oil from tar sands mining—much
more than the 0.1 to 0.3 barrels of water needed for each barrel of conventional
crude. Which is why the tar sands mines and upgrading plants are surrounded by
those giant tailings “ponds” visible from space. Fracking for both shale gas and
“tight oil” similarly requires far more water than conventional drilling and is
much more water-intensive than the fracking methods used in the 1990s.
According to a 2012 study, modern fracking “events” (as they are called) use an
average of five million gallons of water—“70 to 300 times the amount of fluid
used in traditional fracking.” Once used, much of this water is radioactive and
toxic. In 2012, the industry created 280 billion gallons of such wastewater in the
U.S. alone—“enough to flood all of Washington DC beneath a 22ft deep toxic
lagoon,” as The Guardian noted.20

In other words, extreme energy demands that we destroy a whole lot of the
essential substance we need to survive—water—just to keep extracting more of
the very substances threatening our survival and that we can power our lives
without.
This is coming, moreover, at a time when freshwater sources are imperiled
around the world. Indeed, the water used in extraction operations often comes
from aquifers that are already depleted from years of serial droughts, as is the
case in southern California, where prospectors are eyeing the enormous
Monterey Shale, and in Texas, where fracking has skyrocketed in recent years.
Meanwhile, the Karoo—an arid and spectacular region of South Africa that
Shell is planning to frack—literally translates as “land of the great thirst.”
Which helps explain why Oom Johannes Willemse, a local spiritual leader, says,
“Water is so holy. If you don’t have water, you don’t have anything worth living
for.” He adds, “I will fight to the death. I won’t allow this water to be
destroyed.”21
The fight against pollution and climate change can seem abstract at times;
but wherever they live, people will fight for their water. Even die for it.
“Can we live without water?” the antifracking farmers chant in Pungesti,
Romania.
“No!”
“Can we live without Chevron?”
“Yes!”22
These truths emerge not out of an abstract theory about “the commons” but
out of lived experience. Growing in strength and connecting communities in all
parts of the world, they speak to something deep and unsettled in many of us.
We know that we are trapped within an economic system that has it backward;
it behaves as if there is no end to what is actually finite (clean water, fossil fuels,
and the atmospheric space to absorb their emissions) while insisting that there
are strict and immovable limits to what is actually quite flexible: the financial
resources that human institutions manufacture, and that, if imagined differently,
could build the kind of caring society we need. Anni Vassiliou, a youth worker
who is part of the struggle against the Eldorado gold mine in Greece, describes
this as living in “an upside down world. We are in danger of more and more
floods. We are in danger of never, here in Greece, never experiencing spring
and fall again. And they’re telling us that we are in danger of exiting the Euro.
How crazy is that?”23 Put another way, a broken bank is a crisis we can fix; a
broken Arctic we cannot.

Early Wins
It’s not yet clear which side will win many of the struggles outlined in these
pages—only that the companies in the crosshairs are up against far more than
they bargained for. There have, however, already been some solid victories, too
many to fully catalogue here.
For instance, activists have won fracking bans or moratoria in dozens of cities
and towns and in much larger territories too. Alongside France, countries with
moratoria include Bulgaria, the Netherlands, the Czech Republic, and South
Africa (though South Africa has since lifted the ban). Moratoria or bans are
also in place in the states and provinces of Vermont, Quebec, as well as
Newfoundland and Labrador (as of early 2014, New York’s contentious
moratorium still held but it looked shaky). This track record is all the more
remarkable considering that so much local antifracking activism has not
received foundation funding, and is instead financed the old-fashioned way: by
passing the hat at community events and with countless volunteer hours.
And some victories against fossil fuel extraction receive almost no media
attention, but are significant nonetheless. Like the fact that in 2010 Costa Rica
passed a landmark law banning new open-pit mining projects anywhere in the
country. Or that in 2012, the residents of the Colombian archipelago of San
Andrés, Providencia, and Santa Catalina successfully fended off government
plans to open the waters around their beautiful islands to offshore oil drilling.
The region is home to one of the largest coral reefs in the Western Hemisphere
and as one account of the victory puts it, what was established was the fact that
coral is “more important than oil.”II24
And then there is the wave of global victories against coal. Under mounting
pressure, the World Bank as well as other large international funders have
announced that they will no longer offer financing to coal projects except in
exceptional circumstances, which could turn out to be a severe blow to the
industry if other financiers follow suit. In Gerze, Turkey, a major proposed coal
plant on the Black Sea was scuttled under community pressure. The Sierra
Club’s hugely successful “Beyond Coal” campaign has, along with dozens of
local partner organizations, succeeded in retiring 170 coal plants in the United
States and prevented over 180 proposed plants since 2002.25
The campaign to block coal export terminals in the Pacific Northwest has
similarly moved from strength to strength. Three of the planned terminals—one
near Clatskanie, Oregon, another in Coos Bay, Oregon, and another in

Hoquiam, Washington—have already been nixed, the result of forceful
community activism, much of it organized by the Power Past Coal coalition.
Several port proposals are still pending but resistance is fierce, particularly to the
largest of the bunch, just outside Bellingham, Washington. “It’s not a fun time
to be in the coal industry these days,” said Nick Carter, president and chief
operating officer of the U.S. coal company Natural Resource Partners. “It’s not
much fun to get up every day, go to work and spend your time fighting your own
government.”26
In comparison, the actions against the various tar sands pipelines have not
yet won any clear victories, only a series of very long delays. But those delays
matter a great deal because they have placed a question mark over the capacity
of Alberta’s oil patch to make good on its growth projections. And if there is
one thing billion-dollar investors hate, it’s political uncertainty. If Alberta’s
landlocked oil patch can’t guarantee its investors a reliable route to the sea
where bitumen can be loaded onto tankers, then, as the province’s former
minister of energy Ron Liepert put it, “the investment is going to dry up.” The
head of one of the largest oil companies in the tar sands confirmed this in
January 2014. “If there were no more pipeline expansions, I would have to slow
down,” Cenovus CEO Brian Ferguson said. He clearly considered this some kind
of threat, but from a climate perspective it sounded like the best news in years.27
Even if these tactics succeed only in slowing expansion plans, the delays will
buy time for clean energy sources to increase their market share and to be seen
as more viable alternatives, weakening the power of the fossil fuel lobby. And,
even more significantly, the delays give residents of the largest markets in Asia a
window of opportunity to strengthen their own demands for a clean energy
revolution.
Already, these demands are spreading so rapidly that it isn’t at all clear how
long the market for new coal-fired plants and extra-dirty gasoline in Asia will
continue to expand. In India, Blockadia-style uprisings have been on full display
in recent years, with people’s movements against coal-fired power plants
significantly slowing the rush to dirty energy in some regions. The southeastern
state of Andhra Pradesh has been the site of several iconic struggles, like one in
the village of Kakarapalli, surrounded by rice patties and coconut groves, where
local residents can be seen staffing a semipermanent checkpoint under a baobab
tree at the entrance to town. The encampment chokes off the only road leading
to a half-built power plant where construction was halted amidst protests in
2011. In nearby Sompeta, another power plant proposal was stopped by a

breakthrough alliance of urban middle-class professionals and subsistence
farmers and fishers who united to protect the nearby wetlands. After police
charged a crowd of protesters in 2010, shooting dead at least two people, a
national uproar forced the National Environment Appellate Authority to
revoke the permit for the project.28 The community remains vigilant, with a
daily rotating hunger strike entering its 1,500th day at the beginning of 2014.
China, meanwhile, is in the midst of a very public and emotional debate
about its crisis levels of urban air pollution, in large part the result of the
country’s massive reliance on coal. There have been surprisingly large and
militant protests against the construction of new coal-fired plants, most
spectacularly in Haimen, a small city in Guangdong Province. In December
2011, as many as thirty thousand residents surrounded a government building
and blocked a highway to protest plans to expand a coal-fired power plant.
Citing concerns about cancer and other health problems blamed on the existing
plant, the demonstrators withstood days of attacks by police, including tear gas
and reported beatings with batons. They were there to send the message, as one
protester put it, that, “This is going to affect our future generations. They still
need to live.” The plant expansion was suspended.29
Chinese peasants who rely on traditional subsistence activities like
agriculture and fishing have a history of militant uprisings against industrial
projects that cause displacement and disease, whether toxic factories, highways,
or mega-dams. Very often these actions attract severe state repression, including
deaths in custody of protest leaders. The projects usually go ahead regardless of
the opposition, though there have been some notable successes.
What has changed in China in recent years—and what is of paramount
concern to the ruling party—is that the country’s elites, the wealthy winners in
China’s embrace of full-throttle capitalism, are increasingly distressed by the
costs of industrialization. Indeed, Li Bo, who heads Friends of Nature, the oldest
environmental organization in China, describes urban air pollution as “a
superman for Chinese environment issues,” laughing at the irony of an
environmentalist having “to thank smog.” The reason, he explains, is that the
elites had been able to insulate themselves from previous environmental threats,
like baby milk and water contamination, because “the rich, the powerful, have
special channels of delivery, safer products [delivered] to their doorsteps.” But
no matter how rich you are, there is no way to hide from the “blanket” of toxic
air. “Nobody can do anything for special [air] delivery,” he says. “And that’s the
beauty of it.”30

To put the health crisis in perspective, the World Health Organization sets
the guideline for the safe presence of fine particles of dangerous air pollutants
(known as PM2.5) at 25 micrograms or less per cubic meter; 250 is considered
hazardous by the U.S. government. In January 2014, in Beijing, levels of these
carcinogens hit 671. The ubiquitous paper masks haven’t been enough to
prevent outbreaks of respiratory illness, or to protect children as young as eight
from being diagnosed with lung cancer. Shanghai, meanwhile, has introduced
an emergency protocol in which kindergartens and elementary schools are
automatically shut down and all large-scale outdoor gatherings like concerts and
soccer games are canceled when the levels of particulate matter in the air top
450 micrograms per cubic meter. No wonder Chen Jiping, a former senior
Communist Party official, now retired, admitted in March 2013 that pollution is
now the single greatest cause of social unrest in the country, even more than
land disputes.31
China’s unelected leaders have long since deflected demands for democracy
and human rights by touting the ruling party’s record of delivering galloping
economic growth. As Li Bo puts it, the rhetoric was always, “We get rich first,
we deal with the environment problems second.” That worked for a long time,
but now, he says, “their argument has all of a sudden suffocated in the smog.”
The pressure for a more sustainable development path has forced the
government to cut its targeted growth to a rate lower than China had
experienced in more than a decade, and to launch huge alternative energy
programs. Many dirty-energy projects, meanwhile, have been canceled or
delayed. In 2011, a third of the Chinese coal-fired power plants that had been
approved for construction “were stalled and investments in new coal plants
weren’t even half the level they were in 2005,” according to Justin Guay,
associate director of the Sierra Club’s International Climate Program. “Even
better, China actually closed down over 80 gigawatts of coal plants between
2001–2010 and is planning to phase out another 20 GW. To put that in
perspective that’s roughly the size of all electricity sources in Spain, home to the
world’s 11th largest electricity sector.” (In an effort to reduce smog, the
government is also exploring the potential for natural gas fracking, but in an
earthquake-prone country with severe water shortages, it’s a plan unlikely to
quell unrest.)32
All this pushback from within China is of huge significance to the broader
fossil-fuel resistance, from Australia to North America. It means that if tar sands
pipelines and coal export terminals can be held off for just a few more years, the

market for the dirty products the coal and oil companies are trying to ship to
Asia could well dry up. Something of a turning point took place in July 2013
when the multinational investment banking firm Goldman Sachs published a
research paper titled, “The Window for Thermal Coal Investment Is Closing.”
Less than six months later, Goldman Sachs sold its 49 percent stake in the
company that is developing the largest of the proposed coal export terminals,
the one near Bellingham, Washington, having apparently concluded that
window had already closed.33
These victories add up: they have kept uncountable millions of tons of
carbon and other greenhouse gases out of the atmosphere. Whether or not
climate change has been a primary motivator, the local movements behind
them deserve to be recognized as unsung carbon keepers, who, by protecting
their beloved forests, mountains, rivers, and coastlines, are helping to protect all
of us.

Fossil Free: The Divestment Movement
Climate activists are under no illusion that shutting down coal plants, blocking
tar sands pipelines, and passing fracking bans will be enough to lower emissions
as rapidly and deeply as science demands. There are just too many extraction
operations already up and running and too many more being pushed
simultaneously. And oil multinationals are hyper-mobile—they move wherever
they can dig.
With this in mind, discussions are under way to turn the “no new fossil
frontiers” principle behind these campaigns into international law. Proposals
include a Europe-wide ban on fracking (in 2012, more than a third of the 766
members of the European Parliament cast votes in favor of an immediate
moratorium).34 There is a growing campaign calling for a worldwide ban on
offshore drilling in the sensitive Arctic region, as well as in the Amazon
rainforest. And activists are similarly beginning to push for a global moratorium
on tar sands extraction anywhere in the world, on the grounds that it is
sufficiently carbon-intensive to merit transnational action.
Another tactic spreading with startling speed is the call for public interest
institutions like colleges, faith organizations, and municipal governments to sell
whatever financial holdings they have in fossil companies. The divestment
movement emerged organically out of various Blockadia-style attempts to block

carbon extraction at its source—specifically, out of the movement against
mountaintop removal coal mining in Appalachia, which was looking for a tactic
to put pressure on coal companies that had made it clear that they were
indifferent to local opinion. Those local activists were later joined by a national
and then international campaign spearheaded by 350.org, which extended the
divestment call to include all fossil fuels, not just coal. The idea behind the
tactic was to target not just individual unpopular projects but the logic that is
driving this entire wave of frenetic, high-risk extraction.
The divestment campaign is based on the idea—outlined so compellingly by
Bill McKibben—that anyone with a basic grasp of arithmetic can look at how
much carbon the fossil fuel companies have in their reserves, subtract how much
carbon scientists tell us we can emit and still keep global warming below 2
degrees Celsius, and conclude that the fossil fuel companies have every
intention of pushing the planet beyond the boiling point.
These simple facts have allowed the student-led divestment movement to put
the fossil fuel companies’ core business model on trial, arguing that they have
become rogue actors whose continued economic viability relies on radical
climate destabilization—and that, as such, any institution claiming to serve the
public interest has a moral responsibility to liberate itself from these odious
profits. “What the fossil fuel divestment movement is saying to companies is
your fundamental business model of extracting and burning carbon is going to
create an uninhabitable planet. So you need to stop. You need a new business
model,” explains Chloe Maxmin, coordinator of Divest Harvard.35 And young
people have a special moral authority in making this argument to their school
administrators: these are the institutions entrusted to prepare them for the
future; so it is the height of hypocrisy for those same institutions to profit from
an industry that has declared war on the future at the most elemental level.
No tactic in the climate wars has resonated more powerfully. Within six
months of the campaign’s official launch in November 2012, there were active
divestment campaigns on over three hundred campuses and in more than one
hundred U.S. cities, states, and religious institutions. The demand soon spread
to Canada, Australia, the Netherlands, and Britain. At the time of publication,
thirteen U.S. colleges and universities had announced their intention to divest
their endowments of fossil fuel stocks and bonds, and the leaders of more than
twenty-five North American cities had made similar commitments, including
San Francisco and Seattle. Around forty religious institutions had done the
same. The biggest victory to date came in May 2014 when Stanford University

—with a huge endowment worth $18.7 billion—announced it would be selling
its coal stocks.36
Critics have been quick to point out that divestment won’t bankrupt Exxon;
if Harvard, with its nearly $33 billion endowment, sells its stock, someone else
will snap it up. But this misses the power of the strategy: every time students,
professors, and faith leaders make the case for divestment, they are chipping
away at the social license with which these companies operate. As Sara
Blazevic, a divestment organizer at Swarthmore College, puts it, the movement
is “taking away the hold that the fossil fuel industry has over our political system
by making it socially unacceptable and morally unacceptable to be financing
fossil fuel extraction.” And Cameron Fenton, one of the leaders of the
divestment push in Canada, adds, “No one is thinking we’re going to bankrupt
fossil fuel companies. But what we can do is bankrupt their reputations and take
away their political power.”37
The eventual goal is to confer on oil companies the same status as tobacco
companies, which would make it much easier to make other important demands
—like bans on political donations from fossil fuel companies and on fossil fuel
advertising on television (for the same public health reasons that we ban
broadcast cigarette ads). Crucially, it might even create the space for a serious
discussion about whether these profits are so illegitimate that they deserve to be
appropriated and reinvested in solutions to the climate crisis. Divestment is just
the first stage of this delegitimization process, but it is already well under way.
None of this is a replacement for major policy changes that would regulate
carbon reduction across the board. But what the emergence of this networked,
grassroots movement means is that the next time climate campaigners get into a
room filled with politicians and polluters to negotiate, there will be many
thousands of people outside the doors with the power to amp up the political
pressure significantly—with heightened boycotts, court cases, and more militant
direct action should real progress fail to materialize. And that is a very
significant shift indeed.
Already, the rise of Blockadia and the fossil fuel divestment movement is
having a huge impact on the mainstream environmental community,
particularly the Big Green groups that had entered into partnerships with fossil
fuel companies (never mind The Nature Conservancy, with its own Texas oil
and gas operation . . . ). Not surprisingly, some of the big pro-corporate green
groups view this new militancy as an unwelcome intrusion on their territory.
When it comes to fracking in particular, groups like the Environmental Defense

Fund have pointedly not joined grassroots calls for drilling bans and a rapid shift
to 100 percent renewables, but have instead positioned themselves as brokers,
offering up “best practices”—developed with industry groups—that will
supposedly address local environmental concerns. (Even when locals make it
abundantly clear that the only best practice they are interested in is an
unequivocal ban on fracking.) “We fear that those who oppose all natural gas
production everywhere are, in effect, making it harder for the U.S. economy to
wean itself from dirty coal,” charged EDF chief counsel Mark Brownstein.38
Predictably, these actions have provoked enormous tensions, with grassroots
activists accusing the EDF of providing cover for polluters and undercutting
their efforts.III39
But not all the Big Greens are reacting this way. Some—like Food & Water
Watch, 350.org, Greenpeace, Rainforest Action Network, and Friends of the
Earth—have been a central part of this new wave of anti-fossil fuel activism
from the beginning. And for others that were more ambivalent, the rapid spread
of a new, take-no-prisoners climate movement appears to have been a wake-up
call; a reminder that they had strayed too far from first principles. This shift has
perhaps been clearest at the Sierra Club, which, under the leadership of its
former executive director, Carl Pope, had attracted considerable controversy
with such corporate-friendly actions as lending its logo to a line of “green”
cleaning products owned by Clorox. Most damaging, Pope had been an
enthusiastic supporter of natural gas and had appeared publicly (even lobbying
on Capitol Hill) to sing the praises of the fossil fuel alongside Aubrey
McClendon, then CEO of Chesapeake Energy—a company at the forefront of
the hydraulic fracking explosion. Many local chapters, neck deep in battles
against fracking, had been livid. And it would later emerge that the Sierra Club
was, in this same period, secretly receiving many millions in donations from
Chesapeake—one of the biggest controversies to hit the movement in
decades.IV40
A great deal has changed at the organization in the years since. The Sierra
Club’s new executive director, Michael Brune, put an end to the secret
arrangement with Chesapeake and canceled the Clorox deal. (Though the
money was replaced with a huge donation from Michael Bloomberg’s
foundation, which—though this was not known at the time—is significantly
invested in oil and natural gas.) Brune was also arrested outside the White
House in a protest against the construction of Keystone XL tar sands pipeline,
breaking the organization’s longtime ban on engaging in civil disobedience.

Perhaps most significantly, the Sierra Club has joined the divestment
movement. It now has a clear policy against investing in, or taking money from,
fossil fuel companies and affiliated organizations.41
In April 2014, the Natural Resources Defense Council announced that it had
helped create “the first equity global index tool that will exclude companies
linked to exploration, ownership or extraction of carbon-based fossil fuel
reserves. This new investment tool will allow investors who claim to be socially
conscious, including foundations, universities, and certain pension groups, to
align their investments with their missions.” The rigor of this new tool remains
to be tested (and I have my doubts) but it represents a shift from a year earlier,
when the NRDC admitted that its own portfolio was invested in mutual funds
and other mixed assets that did not screen for fossil fuels.42
The divestment movement is even (slowly) being embraced by some of the
foundations that finance environmental activism. In January 2014, seventeen
foundations pledged to divest from fossil fuels and invest in clean energy. While
none of the Big Green donors—the Hewlett and Packard Foundations or the
Walton Family Foundation, for example, not to mention Ford or Bloomberg—
were on board, several smaller ones were, including the Wallace Global Fund
and the Park Foundation, both major funders of anti–fossil fuel activism.43
Up until quite recently, there was a widely shared belief that the big oil
companies had such a fail-safe profit-making formula that none of this—not the
divestment campaigns, not the on-the-ground resistance—would make any kind
of dent in their power and wealth. That attitude needed some readjusting in
January 2014 when Shell—which raked in more revenue than any company in
the world in 2013—announced fourth-quarter profits that blindsided investors.
Rather than the previous year’s $5.6 billion quarter, Shell’s new CEO, Ben van
Beurden, announced that the company was now expecting just $2.9 billion, a
jarring 48 percent drop.44
No single event could take the credit, but the company’s various troubles
were clearly adding up: its Arctic misadventures, the uncertainty in the tar
sands, the persistent political unrest in Nigeria, and the growing chatter about a
“carbon bubble” inflating its stock. Reacting to the news, the financial research
company Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. noted that the plummet was “highly
unusual for an integrated oil company” and admitted that it was “a bit
shellshocked.”45

The Democracy Crisis
As the anti–fossil fuel forces gain strength, extractive companies are beginning
to fight back using a familiar tool: the investor protection provisions of free
trade agreements. As previously mentioned, after the province of Quebec
successfully banned fracking, the U.S.-incorporated oil and gas company Lone
Pine Resources announced plans to sue Canada for at least $230 million under
the North American Free Trade Agreement’s rules on expropriation and “fair
and equitable treatment.” In arbitration documents, Lone Pine complained that
the moratorium imposed by a democratically elected government amounted to
an “arbitrary, capricious, and illegal revocation of the Enterprise’s valuable right
to mine for oil and gas under the St. Lawrence River.” It also claimed (rather
incredibly) that this occurred “with no cognizable public purpose”—not to
mention “without a penny of compensation.”46
It’s easy to imagine similar challenges coming from any company whose
extractive dreams are interrupted by a democratic uprising. And indeed after the
Keystone XL pipeline was delayed yet again in April 2014, Canadian and
TransCanada officials began hinting of a possible challenge to the U.S.
government under NAFTA.
In fact, current trade and investment rules provide legal grounds for foreign
corporations to fight virtually any attempt by governments to restrict the
exploitation of fossil fuels, particularly once a carbon deposit has attracted
investment and extraction has begun. And when the aim of the investment is
explicitly to export the oil, gas, and coal and sell it on the world market—as is
increasingly the case—successful campaigns to block those exports could well be
met with similar legal challenges, since imposing “quantitative restrictions” on
the free flow of goods across borders violates a fundamental tenet of trade law.47
“I really do think in order to combat the climate crisis, fundamentally we
need to strip the power out of the fossil fuel industry, which raises enormous
investment challenges in the trade context,” says Ilana Solomon, the Sierra
Club’s trade expert. “As we begin to regulate the fossil fuel industry, for example
in the United States, the industry may increasingly respond by seeking to export
raw materials, whether it’s coal, or natural gas, and under trade law it is literally
illegal to stop the exports of those resources once they’re mined. So it’s very
hard to stop.”48
It is unsurprising, then, that as Blockadia victories mount, so do the
corporate trade challenges. More investment disputes are being filed than ever

before, with a great many initiated by fossil fuel companies—as of 2013, a full
sixty out of 169 pending cases at the World Bank’s dispute settlement tribunal
had to do with the oil and gas or mining sectors, compared to a mere seven
extraction cases throughout the entire 1980s and 1990s. According to Lori
Wallach, director of Public Citizen’s Global Trade Watch, of the more than $3
billion in compensation already awarded under U.S. free trade agreements and
bilateral investment treaties, more than 85 percent “pertains to challenges
against natural resource, energy, and environmental policies.”49
None of this should be surprising. Of course the richest and most powerful
companies in the world will exploit the law to try to stamp out real and
perceived threats and to lock in their ability to dig and drill wherever they wish
in the world. And it certainly doesn’t help that many of our governments seem
determined to hand out even more lethal legal weapons in the form of new and
expanded trade deals, which companies, in turn, will use against governments’
own domestic laws.
There may, however, be an unexpected upside to the aggressive use of trade
law to quash environmental wins: after a decade lull when few seemed to be
paying attention to the arcane world of free trade negotiations, a new
generation of activists is once again becoming attuned to the democratic threat
these treaties represent. Indeed there is now more public scrutiny and debate
about trade agreements than there has been in years.
The point of this scrutiny, however, should not be to throw up our hands in
the face of yet another obstacle standing in the way of sensible action on
climate. Because while it is true that the international legal architecture of
corporate rights is both daunting and insidious, the well-kept secret behind
these deals is that they are only as powerful as our governments allow them to
be. They are filled with loopholes and workarounds so any government that is
serious about adopting climate polices that reduce emissions in line with science
could certainly find a way to do so, whether by aggressively challenging trade
rulings that side with polluters, or finding creative policy tweaks to get around
them, or refusing to abide by rulings and daring reprisals (since these institutions
cannot actually force governments to change laws), or attempting to renegotiate
the rules. Put another way, the real problem is not that trade deals are allowing
fossil fuel companies to challenge governments, it’s that governments are not
fighting back against these corporate challenges. And that has far less to do with
any individual trade agreement than it does with the profoundly corrupted state
of our political systems.

Beyond Fossilized Democracies
The process of taking on the corporate-state power nexus that underpins the
extractive economy is leading a great many people to face up to the underlying
democratic crisis that has allowed multinationals to be the authors of the laws
under which they operate—whether at the municipal, state/provincial, national,
or international level. It is this corroded state of our political systems—as
fossilized as the fuel at the center of these battles—that is fast turning Blockadia
into a grassroots pro-democracy movement.
Having the ability to defend one’s community’s water source from danger
seems to a great many people like the very essence of self-determination. What
is democracy if it doesn’t encompass the capacity to decide, collectively, to
protect something that no one can live without?
The insistence on this right to have a say in critical decisions relating to
water, land, and air is the thread that runs through Blockadia. It’s a sentiment
summed up well by Helen Slottje, a former corporate lawyer who has helped
around 170 New York towns to adopt antifracking ordinances: “Are you kidding
me? You think you can just come into my town and tell me you’re going to do
whatever you want, wherever you want, whenever you want it, and I’m going to
have no say? Who do you think you are?” I heard much the same from Marily
Papanikolaou, a wavy-haired Greek mountain-bike guide who had been
perfectly happy raising her toddlers and leading tourists through forest trails, but
now spends her spare time at anti-mine demonstrations and meetings. “I can’t
let anyone come in my village and try to do this and not ask me for my
permission. I live here!” And you can hear something awfully similar from Texas
landowners, irate that a Canadian pipeline company tried to use the law of
eminent domain to gain access to their family land. “I just don’t believe that a
Canadian organization that appears to be building a pipeline for their financial
gain has more right to my land than I do,” said Julia Trigg Crawford, who has
challenged TransCanada in court over its attempt to use her 650-acre ranch
near Paris, Texas, which her grandfather purchased in 1948.50
And yet the most jarring part of the grassroots anti-extraction uprising has
been the rude realization that most communities do appear to lack this power;
that outside forces—a far-off central government, working hand-in-glove with
transnational companies—are simply imposing enormous health and safety risks
on residents, even when that means overturning local laws. Fracking, tar sands
pipelines, coal trains, and export terminals are being proposed in many parts of

the world where a clear majority of the population has made its opposition
unmistakable, at the ballot box, through official consultation processes, and in
the streets.
And yet consent seems beside the point. Again and again, after failing to
persuade communities that these projects are in their genuine best interest,
governments are teaming up with corporate players to roll over the opposition,
using a combination of physical violence and draconian legal tools reclassifying
peaceful activists as terrorists.V51
Nongovernmental organizations of all kinds find themselves under increasing
surveillance, both by security forces and by corporations, often working in
tandem. Pennsylvania’s Office of Homeland Security hired a private contractor
to gather intelligence on antifracking groups, which it proceeded to share with
major shale gas companies. The same phenomenon is unfolding in France,
where the utility EDF was convicted in 2011 of unlawfully spying on
Greenpeace. In Canada, meanwhile, it was revealed that Chuck Strahl, then
chair of the committee overseeing the country’s spy agency, the Canadian
Security Intelligence Service, was registered as a lobbyist for Enbridge, the
company behind the hugely controversial Northern Gateway tar sands pipeline.
That was a problem because the National Energy Board had directed the agency
to assess the security threats to pipeline projects, which was thinly veiled code
for spying on environmentalists and First Nations.52
Strahl’s dual role raised the question of whether Enbridge could also gain
access to the information gleaned. Then it came out that Strahl wasn’t the only
one who seemed to be working for the government and the fossil fuel companies
simultaneously. As the CBC reported, “Half of the other Harper government
appointees keeping an eye on the spies also have ties to the oil business”—
including one member who sits on the board of Enbridge Gas NB, a wholly
owned regional subsidiary of the pipeline company, and another who had been
on TransCanada’s board. Strahl resigned amid the controversy; the others did
not.53
The collusion between corporations and the state has been so boorishly
defiant that it’s almost as if the communities standing in the way of these
projects are viewed as little more than “overburden”—that ugliest of words used
by the extractive industries to describe the “waste earth” that must be removed
to access a tar sands or mineral deposit. Like the trees, soil, rocks, and clay that
the industry’s machines scrape up, masticate, and pile into great slag heaps,

democracy is getting torn into rubble too, chewed up and tossed aside to make
way for the bulldozers.
That was certainly the message when the three-person Joint Review Panel
that had been so scared by the Heiltsuk community’s welcome in Bella Bella
finally handed down its recommendation to Canada’s federal government. The
Northern Gateway pipeline should go ahead, the panel announced. And though
it enumerated 209 conditions that should be met before construction—from
submiting caribou habitat protection plans to producing an updated inventory
of waterway crossings “in both Adobe PDF and Microsoft Excel spreadsheet
formats”—the ruling was almost universally interpreted as a political green
light.54
Only two out of the over one thousand people who spoke at the panel’s
community hearings in British Columbia supported the project. One poll
showed that 80 percent of the province’s residents opposed having more oil
tankers along their marine-rich coastline. That a supposedly impartial review
body could rule in favor of the pipeline in the face of this kind of overwhelming
opposition was seen by many in Canada as clear evidence of a serious underlying
crisis, one far more about money and power than the environment. “Sadly,
today’s results are exactly what we expected,” said anti-pipeline campaigner
Torrance Coste, “proof that our democratic system is broken.”55
In a sense, these are merely local manifestations of the global democratic
crisis represented by climate change itself. As Venezuelan political scientist
Edgardo Lander aptly puts it, “The total failure of climate negotiation serves to
highlight the extent to which we now live in a post-democratic society. The
interests of financial capital and the oil industry are much more important than
the democratic will of people around the world. In the global neoliberal society
profit is more important than life.” Or, as George Monbiot, The Guardian’s
indispensable environmental columnist, put it on the twenty-year anniversary of
the Rio Earth Summit, “Was it too much to have asked of the world’s
governments, which performed such miracles in developing stealth bombers and
drone warfare, global markets and trillion-dollar bailouts, that they might spend
a tenth of the energy and resources they devoted to these projects on defending
our living planet? It seems, sadly, that it was.” Indeed, the failure of our political
leaders to even attempt to ensure a safe future for us represents a crisis of
legitimacy of almost unfathomable proportions.56
And yet a great many people have reacted to this crisis not by abandoning
the promise of genuine self-government, but rather by attempting to make good

on that promise in the spheres where they still have real influence. It’s striking,
for instance, that even as national governments and international agencies fail
us, cities are leading the way on climate action around the world, from Bogotá
to Vancouver. Smaller communities are also taking the lead in the democratic
preparation for a climate-changed future. This can be seen most clearly in the
fast-growing Transition Town movement. Started in 2006 in Totnes—an
ancient market town in Devon, England, with a bohemian reputation—the
movement has since spread to more than 460 locations in at least forty-three
countries worldwide. Each Transition Town (and this may be an actual town or
a neighborhood in a larger city) undertakes to design what the movement calls
an “energy descent action plan”—a collectively drafted blueprint for lowering
its emissions and weaning itself off fossil fuels. The process opens up rare spaces
for participatory democracy, with neighbors packing consultation meetings at
city halls to share ideas about everything from how to increase their food
security through increased local agriculture to building more efficient affordable
housing.57
Nor is it all dry planning meetings. In Totnes, the local Transition group
organizes frequent movie nights, public lectures, and discussions, as well as street
festivals to celebrate each landmark toward greater sustainability. This too is
part of responding to the climate crisis, as critical as having secure food supplies
and building sturdy seawalls. Because a key determinant in how any community
survives an extreme weather event is its connective tissue—the presence of
small local businesses and common spaces where neighbors can get to know one
another and make sure that elderly people aren’t forgotten during crushing heat
waves or storms. As the environmental writer and analyst David Roberts has
observed, “the ingredients of resilience” are “overlapping social and civic circles,
filled with people who, by virtue of living in close proximity and sharing
common spaces, know and take care of each other. The greatest danger in times
of stress or threat is isolation. Finding ways of expanding public spaces and
nurturing civic involvement is not just some woolly-headed liberal project—it’s
a survival strategy.”58
The intimacy of local politics is also what has turned this tier of government
into an important site of resistance to the carbon extraction frenzy—whether
it’s cities voting to take back control over a coal-burning utility that won’t
switch to renewables (as so many citizens are doing in Germany), or
municipalities adopting policies to divest city holdings of fossil fuels, or towns
passing antifracking ordinances. And these are not mere symbolic expressions of

dissent. Commenting on the stakes of his client’s court challenge to local
antifracking ordinances, Thomas West, a lawyer for Norse Energy Corporation
USA, told The New York Times, “It’s going to decide the future of the oil and
gas industry in the state of New York.”59
Local ordinances are not the only—or even the most powerful—
unconventional legal tools that may help Blockadia to extend its early victories.
This became apparent when the panel reviewing Enbridge’s Northern Gateway
pipeline announced its recommendations. The news that it had greenlighted the
federal government to approve the much loathed tar sands project was not, for
the most part, greeted with despair. Instead, a great many Canadians remained
convinced that the pipeline would never go ahead and that the British
Columbia coast would be saved—no matter what the panel said or what the
federal government did.
“The federal cabinet needs First Nations’ approval and social license from
British Columbians, and they have neither,” said Sierra Club BC campaigns
director Caitlyn Vernon. And referring to the Save the Fraser Declaration
signed by Chief Baptiste and so many others, she added, “First Nations have
formally banned pipelines and tankers from their territories on the basis of
Indigenous law.”60 It was a sentiment echoed repeatedly in news reports: that
the legal title of the province’s First Nations was so powerful that even if the
federal government did approve the pipeline (which it eventually did in June
2014), the project would be successfully stopped in the courts through
Indigenous legal challenges, as well as in the forests through direct action.
Is it true? As the next chapter will explore, the historical claims being made
by Indigenous peoples around the world as well as by developing countries for an
honoring of historical debts indeed have the potential to act as counterweights
to increasingly undemocratic and intransigent governments. But the outcome of
this power struggle is by no means certain. As always, it depends on what kind
of movement rallies behind these human rights and moral claims.

I. When a make-up hearing was scheduled by the Joint Review Panel months later, it was held in a
predominantly white community elsewhere in the province.
II. Sadly, this pristine UNESCO Biosphere Reserve is once again at risk after an international court
ruling declared the waters surrounding the Caribbean islands to be legally owned by the government of

Nicaragua (though the islands themselves remain part of Colombia). And Nicaragua has stated its
intention to drill.
III. For instance, in May 2013, sixty-eight groups and individuals—including Friends of the Earth,
Greenpeace, and Robert Kennedy Jr.—signed a letter that directly criticized the EDF and and its president
Fred Krupp for their role in creating the industry-partnered Center for Sustainable Shale Development
(CSSD). “CSSD bills itself as a collaborative effort between ‘diverse interests with a common goal,’ but our
goals as a nation are not, and cannot, be the same as those of Chevron, Consol Energy, EQT Corporation,
and Shell, all partners in CSSD,” the letter states. “These corporations are interested in extracting as much
shale gas and oil as possible, and at a low cost. We are interested in minimizing the extraction and
consumption of fossil fuels and in facilitating a rapid transition to the real sustainable energy sources—the
sun, the wind, and hydropower.”
IV. Reached by email, Carl Pope, who had not previously commented on the controversy, explained his
actions as follows: “Climate advocates were at war with the coal industry, and at that moment Chesapeake
was willing to ally with us. I understand the concerns of those who thought that alliance was a bad idea—
but it is likely that without it about 75 of the pending 150 new coal fired power plants we stopped would
have been built instead.” He added, “What I do regret is the failure at the time to understand the scale and
form that the shale gas and oil revolution would take, which led us to make inadequate investments in
getting ready for the assault that would soon be coming at states like Pennsylvania, West Virginia and
Colorado. That was a significant, and costly, failure of vision.”
V. This reached truly absurd levels in December 2013 when two twentysomething antifracking activists
were charged with staging a “terrorism hoax” after they unfurled cloth protest banners at the headquarters
of Devon Energy in Oklahoma City. Playing on the Hunger Games slogan, one of the banners said: “THE
ODDS ARE NEVER IN OUR FAVOR.” Standard, even benign activist fare—except for one detail.
According to Oklahoma City Police captain Dexter Nelson, as the banner was lowered it shed a “black
powder substance” that was meant to mimic a “biochemical assault,” as the police report put it. That
nefarious powder, the captain stated, was “later determined to be glitter.” Never mind that the video of the
event showed absolutely no concern about the falling glitter from the assembled onlookers. “I could have
swept it up in two minutes if they gave me a broom,” said Stefan Warner, one of those charged and facing
the prospect of up to ten years in jail.

11

YOU AND WHAT ARMY?
Indigenous Rights and the Power of Keeping Our Word
“I never thought I would ever see the day that we would come together. Relationships are
changing, stereotypes are disappearing, there’s more respect for one another. If anything,
this Enbridge Northern Gateway has unified British Columbia.”
—Geraldine Thomas-Flurer, coordinator of the Yinka Dene Alliance, a First Nations coalition opposing the Enbridge Northern
Gateway pipeline, 20131

“There is never peace in West Virginia because there is never justice.”
—Labor organizer Mary Harris “Mother” Jones, 19252

The guy from Standard & Poor’s was leafing through the fat binder on the
round table in the meeting room, brow furrowed, skimming and nodding.
It was 2004 and I found myself sitting in on a private meeting between two
important First Nations leaders and a representative of one of the three most
powerful credit rating agencies in the world. The meeting had been requested by
Arthur Manuel, a former Neskonlith chief in the interior of British Columbia,
now spokesperson for the Indigenous Network on Economies and Trade.
Arthur Manuel, who comes from a long line of respected Native leaders, is an
internationally recognized thinker on the question of how to force belligerent
governments to respect Indigenous land rights, though you might not guess it
from his plainspoken manner or his tendency to chuckle mid-sentence. His
theory is that nothing will change until there is a credible threat that
continuing to violate Native rights will carry serious financial costs, whether for
governments or investors. So he has been looking for different ways to inflict
those costs.

That’s why he had initiated a correspondence with Standard & Poor’s, which
routinely blesses Canada with a AAA credit rating, a much coveted indicator to
investors that the country is a safe and secure place in which to sink their
money. In letters to the agency, Manuel had argued that Canada did not deserve
such a high rating because it was failing to report a very important liability: a
massive unpaid debt that takes the form of all the wealth that had been
extracted from unceded Indigenous land, without consent—since 1846.3 He
further explained the various Supreme Court cases that had affirmed that
Aboriginal and Treaty Rights were still very much alive.
After much back-and-forth, Manuel had managed to get a meeting with
Joydeep Mukherji, director of the Sovereign Ratings Group, and the man
responsible for issuing Canada’s credit rating. The meeting took place at S&P’s
headquarters, a towering building just off Wall Street. Manuel had invited
Guujaaw, the charismatic president of the Haida Nation, to help him make the
case about those unpaid debts, and at the last minute had asked me to come
along as a witness. Unaware that, post-9/11, official ID is required to get into all
major Manhattan office buildings, the Haida leader had left his passport in his
hotel room; dressed in a short-sleeved checked shirt and with a long braid down
his back, Guujaaw almost didn’t make it past security. But after some
negotiation with security (and intervention from Manuel’s contact upstairs), we
made it in.
At the meeting, Manuel presented the Okanagan writ of summons, and
explained that similar writs had been filed by many other First Nations. These
simple documents, asserting land title to large swaths of territory, put the
Canadian government on notice that these bands had every intention of taking
legal action to get the economic benefits of lands being used by resource
companies without their consent. These writs, Manuel explained, represented
trillions of dollars’ worth of unacknowledged liability being carried by the
Canadian state.
Guujaaw then solemnly presented Mukherji with the Haida Nation’s
registered statement of claim, a seven-page legal document that had been filed
before the Supreme Court of British Columbia seeking damages and reparations
from the provincial government for unlawfully exploiting and degrading lands
and waters that are rightfully controlled by the Haida. Indeed, at that moment,
the case was being argued before the Supreme Court of Canada, challenging
both the logging giant Weyerhaeuser and the provincial government of British
Columbia over a failure to consult before logging the forests on the Pacific

island of Haida Gwaii. “Right now the Canadian and British Columbia
governments are using our land and our resources—Aboriginal and Treaty
Rights—as collateral for all the loans they get from Wall Street,” Manuel said.
“We are in fact subsidizing the wealth of Canada and British Columbia with our
impoverishment.”4
Mukherji and an S&P colleague listened and silently skimmed Manuel’s
documents. A polite question was asked about Canada’s recent federal elections
and whether the new government was expected to change the enforcement of
Indigenous land rights. It was clear that none of this was new to them—not the
claims, not the court rulings, not the constitutional language. They did not
dispute any of the facts. But Mukherji explained as nicely as he possibly could
that the agency had come to the conclusion that Canada’s First Nations did not
have the power to enforce their rights and therefore to collect on their
enormous debts. Which meant, from S&P’s perspective, that those debts
shouldn’t affect Canada’s stellar credit rating. The company would, however,
continue to monitor the situation to see if the dynamics changed.
And with that we were back on the street, surrounded by New Yorkers
clutching iced lattes and barking into cell phones. Manuel snapped a few
pictures of Guujaaw underneath the Standard & Poor’s sign, flanked by security
guards in body armor. The two men seemed undaunted by what had transpired;
I, on the other hand, was reeling. Because what the men from S&P were really
saying to these two representatives of my country’s original inhabitants was:
“We know you never sold your land. But how are you going to make the
Canadian government keep its word? You and what army?”
At the time, there did not seem to be a good answer to that question.
Indigenous rights in North America did not have powerful forces marshaled
behind them and they had plenty of powerful forces standing in opposition. Not
just government, industry, and police, but also corporate-owned media that cast
them as living in the past and enjoying undeserved special rights, while those
same media outlets usually failed to do basic public education about the nature
of the treaties our governments (or rather their British predecessors) had signed.
Even most intelligent, progressive thinkers paid little heed: sure they supported
Indigenous rights in theory, but usually as part of the broader multicultural
mosaic, not as something they needed to actively defend.
However, in perhaps the most politically significant development of the rise
of Blockadia-style resistance, this dynamic is changing rapidly—and an army of

sorts is beginning to coalesce around the fight to turn Indigenous land rights
into hard economic realities that neither government nor industry can ignore.

The Last Line of Defense
As we have seen, the exercise of Indigenous rights has played a central role in
the rise of the current wave of fossil fuel resistance. The Nez Perce were the
ones who were ultimately able to stop the big rigs on Highway 12 in Idaho and
Montana; the Northern Cheyenne continue to be the biggest barrier to coal
development in southeastern Montana; the Lummi present the greatest legal
obstacle to the construction of the biggest proposed coal export terminal in the
Pacific Northwest; the Elsipogtog First Nation managed to substantially
interfere with seismic testing for fracking in New Brunswick; and so on. Going
back further, it’s worth remembering that the struggles of the Ogoni and Ijaw in
Nigeria included a broad demand for self-determination and resource control
over land that both groups claimed was illegitimately taken from them during
the colonial formation of Nigeria. In short, Indigenous land and treaty rights
have proved a major barrier for the extractive industries in many of the key
Blockadia struggles.
And through these victories, a great many non-Natives are beginning to
understand that these rights represent some of the most robust tools available to
prevent ecological crisis. Even more critically, many non-Natives are also
beginning to see that the ways of life that Indigenous groups are protecting have
a great deal to teach about how to relate to the land in ways that are not purely
extractive. This represents a true sea change over a very short period of time.
My own country offers a glimpse into the speed of this shift.
The Canadian Constitution and the Canadian Charter of Rights and
Freedoms acknowledge and offer protection to “aboriginal rights,” including
treaty rights, the right to self-government, and the right to practice traditional
culture and customs. There was, however, a widespread perception among
Canadians that treaties represented agreements to fully surrender large portions
of lands in exchange for the provision of public services and designated rights on
much smaller reserves. Many Canadians also assumed that in the lands not
covered by any treaty (which is a great deal of the country, 80 percent of British
Columbia alone), non-Natives could pretty much do what they wished with the
natural resources. First Nations had rights on their reserves, but if they once had

rights off them as well, they had surely lost them by attrition over the years.
Finders keepers sort of thing, or so the thinking went.5
All of this was turned upside down in the late 1990s when the Supreme
Court of Canada handed down a series of landmark decisions in cases designed
to test the limits of Aboriginal title and treaty rights. First came Delgamuukw v.
British Columbia in 1997, which ruled that in those large parts of B.C. that were
not covered by any treaty, Aboriginal title over that land had never been
extinguished and still needed to be settled. This was interpreted by many First
Nations as an assertion that they still had full rights to that land, including the
right to fish, hunt, and gather there. Chelsea Vowel, a Montréal-based Métis
educator and Indigenous legal scholar, explains the shockwave caused by the
decision. “One day, Canadians woke up to a legal reality in which millions of
acres of land were recognized as never having been acquired by the Crown,”
which would have “immediate implications for other areas of the country where
no treaties ceding land ownership were ever signed.”6
Two years later, in 1999, the ruling known as the Marshall decision affirmed
that when the Mi’kmaq, Maliseet, and Passamaquoddy First Nations, largely
based in New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, signed “peace and friendship”
treaties with the British Crown in 1760 and 1761, they did not—as so many
Canadians then assumed—agree to give up rights to their ancestral lands.
Rather they were agreeing to share them with settlers on the condition that the
First Nations could continue to use those lands for traditional activities like
fishing, trading, and ceremony. The case was sparked by a single fisherman,
Donald Marshall Jr., catching eels out of season and without a license; the court
ruled that it was within the rights of the Mi’kmaq and Maliseet to fish yearround enough to earn a “moderate livelihood” where their ancestors had fished,
exempting them from many of the rules set by the federal government for the
non-Native fishing fleet.7
Many other North American treaties contained similar resource-sharing
provisions. Treaty 6, for instance, which covers large parts of the Alberta tar
sands region, contains clear language stating that “Indians, shall have right to
pursue their avocations of hunting and fishing throughout the tract
surrendered”—in other words, they surrendered only their exclusive rights to the
territory and agreed that the land would be used by both parties, with settlers
and Indigenous peoples pursuing their interests in parallel.8
But any parallel, peaceful coexistence is plainly impossible if one party is
irrevocably altering and poisoning that shared land. And indeed, though it is

not written in the text of the treaty, First Nations elders living in this region
contend that Indigenous negotiators gave permission for the land to be used by
settlers only “to the depth of a plow”—considerably less than the cavernous
holes being dug there today. In the agreements that created modern-day North
America such land-sharing provisions form the basis of most major treaties.
In Canada, the period after the Supreme Court decisions was a tumultuous
one. Federal and provincial governments did little or nothing to protect the
rights that the judges had affirmed, so it fell to Indigenous people to go out on
the land and water and assert them—to fish, hunt, log, and build ceremonial
structures, often without state permission. The backlash was swift. Across the
country non-Native fishers and hunters complained that the “Indians” were
above the law, that they were going to empty the oceans and rivers of fish, take
all the good game, destroy the woods, and on and on. (Never mind the
uninterrupted record of reckless resource mismanagement by all levels of the
Canadian government.)
Tensions came to a head in the Mi’kmaq community of Burnt Church, New
Brunswick. Enraged that the Marshall decision had empowered Mi’kmaq people
to exercise their treaty rights and fish outside of government-approved seasons,
mobs of non-Native fishermen launched a series of violent attacks on their
Native neighbors. In what became known as the Burnt Church Crisis,
thousands of Mi’kmaq lobster traps were destroyed, three fish-processing plants
were ransacked, a ceremonial arbor was burned to the ground, and several
Indigenous people were hospitalized after their truck was attacked. And it
wasn’t just vigilante violence. As the months-long crisis wore on, government
boats staffed with officials in riot gear rammed into Native fishing boats, sinking
two vessels and forcing their crews to jump to safety in the water. The Mi’kmaq
fishers did their best to defend themselves, with the help of the Mi’kmaq
Warrior Society, but they were vastly outnumbered and an atmosphere of fear
prevailed for years. The racism was so severe that at one point a non-Native
fisherman put on a long-haired wig and performed a cartoonish “war dance” on
the deck of his boat in front of delighted television crews.
That was 2000. In 2013, a little more than an hour’s drive down the coast
from Burnt Church, the same Mi’kmaq Warrior Society was once again in the
news, this time because it had joined with the Elsipogtog First Nation to fend off
the Texas company at the center of the province’s fracking showdown. But the
mood and underlying dynamics could not have been more different. This time,
over months of protest, the warriors helped to light a series of ceremonial sacred

fires and explicitly invited the non-Native community to join them on the
barricades “to ensure that the company cannot resume work to extract shale gas
via fracking.” A statement explained, “This comes as part of a larger campaign
that reunites Indigenous, Acadian & Anglo people.” (New Brunswick has a
large French-speaking Acadian population, with its own historical tensions with
the English-speaking majority.)9
Many heeded the call and it was frequently noted that protests led by the
Elsipogtog First Nation were remarkably diverse, drawing participants from all of
the province’s ethnic groups, as well as from First Nations across the country. As
one non-Native participant, Debbi Hauper, told a video crew, “It’s just a real
sense of togetherness. We are united in what is most important. And I think
we’re seeing more and more of government and industries’ methods of trying to
separate us. And let’s face it, these methods have worked for decades. But I
think we’re waking up.”10
There were attempts to revive the old hatreds, to be sure. A police officer was
overheard saying “Crown land belongs to the government, not to fucking
Natives.” And after the conflict with police turned violent, New Brunswick
premier David Alward observed, “Clearly, there are those who do not have the
same values we share as New Brunswickers.” But the community stuck together
and there were solidarity protests in dozens of cities and towns across the
country: “This is not just a First Nations campaign. It’s actually quite a historic
moment where all the major peoples of this province—English, French and
Aboriginal—come together for a common cause,” said David Coon, head of the
Green Party in New Brunswick. “This is really a question of justice. They want
to protect their common lands, water and air from destruction.”11
By then many in the province had come to understand that the Mi’kmaq’s
rights to use their traditional lands and waters to hunt and fish—the same rights
that had sparked race riots a dozen years earlier— represented the best hope for
the majority of New Brunswickers who opposed fracking.12 And new tools were
clearly required. Premier Alward had been a fracking skeptic before he was
elected in 2010 but once in office, he promptly changed his tune, saying the
revenue was needed to pay for social programs and to create jobs—the sort of
flip flop that breeds cynicism about representative democracy the world over.
Indigenous rights, in contrast, are not dependent on the whims of politicians.
The position of the Elsipogtog First Nation was that no treaty gave the
Canadian government the authority to radically alter their ancestral lands. The
right to hunt and fish, affirmed by the Marshall decision, was violated by

industrial activity that threatened the fundamental health of the lands and
waters (since what good is having the right to fish, for instance, when the water
is polluted?). Gary Simon of the Elsipogtog First Nation explains, “I believe our
treaties are the last line of defense to save the clean water for future
generations.”13
It’s the same position the Lummi have taken against the coal export terminal
near Bellingham, Washington, arguing that the vast increase in tanker traffic in
the Strait of Georgia, as well as the polluting impacts of coal dust, violates their
treaty-protected right to fish those waters. (The Lower Elwha Klallam tribe in
Washington State made similar points when its leaders fought to remove two
dams on the Elwha River. They argued, successfully, that by interfering with
salmon runs the dam violated their treaty rights to fish.) And when the U.S.
State Department indicated, in February 2014, that it might soon be offering its
blessing to the Keystone XL pipeline, members of the Lakota Nation
immediately announced that they considered the pipeline construction illegal.
As Paula Antoine, an employee of the Rosebud tribe’s land office, explained,
because the pipeline passes through Lakota treaty-protected traditional territory,
and very close to reservation land, “They aren’t recognizing our treaties, they
are violating our treaty rights and our boundaries by going through there. Any
ground disturbance around that proposed line will affect us.”14
These rights are real and they are powerful, all the more so because many of
the planet’s largest and most dangerous unexploded carbon bombs lie beneath
lands and waters to which Indigenous peoples have legitimate legal claims. No
one has more legal power to halt the reckless expansion of the tar sands than
the First Nations living downstream whose treaty-protected hunting, fishing,
and trapping grounds have already been fouled, just as no one has more legal
power to halt the rush to drill under the Arctic’s melting ice than Inuit, Sami,
and other northern Indigenous tribes whose livelihoods would be jeopardized by
an offshore oil spill. Whether they are able to exercise those rights is another
matter.
This power was on display in January 2014 when a coalition of Alaskan
Native tribes, who had joined forces with several large green groups, won a
major court victory against Shell’s already scandal-plagued Arctic drilling
adventures. Led by the Native village of Point Hope, the coalition argued that
when the U.S. Interior Department handed out drilling permits to Shell and
others in the Chukchi Sea, it failed to take into account the full risks, including
the risks to Indigenous Inupiat ways of life, which are inextricably entwined

with a healthy ocean. As Port Hope mayor Steve Oomittuk explained when the
lawsuit was launched, his people “have hunted and depended on the animals
that migrate through the Chukchi Sea for thousands of years. This is our garden,
our identity, our livelihood. Without it we would not be who we are today. . . .
We oppose any activity that will endanger our way of life and the animals that
we greatly depend on.” Faith Gemmill, executive director of Resisting
Environmental Destruction on Indigenous Lands, one of the groups behind the
lawsuit, notes that for the Inupiat who rely on the Chukchi Sea, “you cannot
separate environmental impacts from subsistence impacts, for they are the
same.”15
A federal appeals court ruled in the coalition’s favor, finding that the
Department of the Interior’s risk assessments were based on estimates that were
“arbitrary and capricious,” or presented “only the best case scenario for
environmental harm.”16 Rather like the shoddy risk assessments that set the
stage for BP’s Deepwater Horizon disaster.
John Sauven, executive director of Greenpeace U.K., described the ruling as
“a massive blow to Shell’s Arctic ambitions.” Indeed just days later, the
company announced that it was putting its Arctic plans on indefinite hold.
“This is a disappointing outcome, but the lack of a clear path forward means
that I am not prepared to commit further resources for drilling in Alaska in
2014,” said Shell CEO Ben van Beurden. “We will look to relevant agencies and
the Court to resolve their open legal issues as quickly as possible.” Without
Indigenous groups raising the human rights stakes in this battle, it’s a victory
that might never have taken place.17
Worldwide, companies pushing for vast new coal mines and coal export
terminals are increasingly being forced to similarly reckon with the unique legal
powers held by Indigenous peoples. For instance, in Western Australia in 2013
the prospect of legal battles over native title was an important factor in derailing
a planned $45 billion LNG (liquefied natural gas) processing plant and port,
and though the state government remains determined to force gas infrastructure
and fracking on the area, Indigenous groups are threatening to assert their
traditional ownership and procedural rights in court. The same is true of
communities facing coal bed methane development in New South Wales.18
Meanwhile, several Indigenous groups in the Amazon have been steadfastly
holding back the oil interests determined to sacrifice new swaths of the great
forests, protecting both the carbon beneath the ground and the carboncapturing trees and soil above those oil and gas deposits. They have asserted

their land rights with increasing success at the Inter-American Court of Human
Rights, which has sided with Indigenous groups against governments in cases
involving natural resource and territorial rights.19 And the U’wa, an isolated
tribe in Colombia’s Andean cloud forests—where the tree canopy is perpetually
shrouded in mist—have made history by resisting repeated attempts by oil giants
to drill in their territory, insisting that stealing the oil beneath the earth would
bring about the tribe’s destruction.(Though some limited drilling has taken
place.)
As the Indigenous rights movement gains strength globally, huge advances
are being made in recognizing the legitimacy of these claims. Most significant
was the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,
adopted by the General Assembly in September 2007 after 143 member states
voted in its favor (the four opposing votes—United States, Canada, Australia,
and New Zealand—would each, under domestic pressure, eventually endorse it
as well). The declaration states that, “Indigenous peoples have the right to the
conservation and protection of the environment and the productive capacity of
their lands or territories and resources.” And further that they have “the right to
redress” for the lands that “have been confiscated, taken, occupied, used or
damaged without their free, prior and informed consent.” Some countries have
even taken the step of recognizing these rights in revised constitutions. Bolivia’s
constitution, approved by voters in 2009, states that Indigenous peoples “are
guaranteed the right to prior consent: obligatory consultation by the
government, acting in good faith and in agreement, prior to the exploitation of
non-renewable natural resources in the territory they inhabit.” A huge, hardwon legal victory.20

Might vs. Rights
And yet despite growing recognition of these rights, there remains a tremendous
gap between what governments say (and sign) and what they do—and there is
no guarantee of winning when these rights are tested in court. Even in countries
with enlightened laws as in Bolivia and Ecuador, the state still pushes ahead
with extractive projects without the consent of the Indigenous people who rely
on those lands.21 And in Canada, the United States, and Australia, these rights
are not only ignored, but Indigenous people know that if they try to physically
stop extractive projects that are clearly illegal, they will in all likelihood find

themselves on the wrong side of a can of pepper spray—or the barrel of a gun.
And while the lawyers argue the intricacies of land title in court, buzzing
chainsaws proceed to topple trees that are four times as old as our countries, and
toxic fracking fluids seep into the groundwater.
The reason industry can get away with this has little to do with what is legal
and everything to do with raw political power: isolated, often impoverished
Indigenous peoples generally lack the monetary resources and social clout to
enforce their rights, and anyway, the police are controlled by the state.
Moreover the costs of taking on multinational extractive companies in court are
enormous. For instance in the landmark “Rainforest Chernobyl” case in which
Ecuador’s highest court ordered Chevron to pay $9.5 billion in damages, a
company spokesman famously said: “We’re going to fight this until hell freezes
over—and then we’ll fight it out on the ice.” (And indeed, the fight still drags
on.)22
I was struck by this profound imbalance when I traveled to the territory of
the Beaver Lake Cree Nation in northern Alberta, a community that is in the
midst of one of the highest-stakes legal battles in the tar sands. In 2008, the
band filed a historic lawsuit charging that by allowing its traditional territories
to be turned into a latticework of oil and gas infrastructure, and by poisoning
and driving away the local wildlife, the provincial and federal governments, as
well as the British Crown, had infringed no fewer than fifteen thousand times
on the First Nation’s treaty rights to continue to hunt, fish, and trap on their
territory.23 What set the case apart was that it was not about one particular
infringement, but an entire model of poisonous, extractive development,
essentially arguing that this model itself constituted a grave treaty violation.
“The Governments of Canada and Alberta have made a lot of promises to
our people and we intend to see those promises kept,” said Al Lameman, the
formidable chief of the Beaver Lake Cree Nation at the time the lawsuit was
filed (Lameman had made history before, filing some of the first Indigenous
human rights challenges against the Canadian government). Against the odds,
the case has proceeded through the Canadian court system, and in March 2012
an Alberta court flatly rejected government efforts to have the case dismissed as
“frivolous,” an “abuse of the Court’s process,” and “unmanageable.”24
A year after that ruling, I met Al Lameman, now retired, and his cousin
Germaine Anderson, an elected band councilor, as well as the former chief’s
niece, Crystal Lameman, who has emerged as one of the most compelling voices
against the tar sands on the international stage. These are three of the people

most responsible for moving the lawsuit forward, and Germaine Anderson had
invited me to a family barbecue to discuss the case.
It was early July and after a long dark winter it was as if a veil had lifted: the
sun was still bright at 10 p.m. and the northern air had a thin, baked quality. Al
Lameman had aged considerably in recent years and slipped in and out of the
conversation. Anderson, almost painfully shy, had also struggled with her
health. The spot where the family met for this gathering was where she spent
the summer months: a small trailer in a clearing in the woods, without running
water or electricity, entirely off the grid.
I knew the Beaver Lake Cree were in a David and Goliath struggle. But on
that endless summer evening, I suddenly understood what this actually meant:
some of the most marginalized people in my country—many of them, like all the
senior members of the Lameman clan, survivors of the intergenerational trauma
of abusive residential schools—are taking on some of the wealthiest and most
powerful forces on the planet. Their heroic battles are not just their people’s
best chance of a healthy future; if court challenges like Beaver Lake’s can
succeed in halting tar sands expansion, they could very well be the best chance
for the rest of us to continue enjoying a climate that is hospitable to human life.
That is a huge burden to bear and that these communities are bearing it with
shockingly little support from the rest of us is an unspeakable social injustice.
A few hours north, a different Indigenous community, the Athabasca
Chipewyan First Nation (ACFN), recently launched another landmark lawsuit,
this one taking on Shell and the Canadian government over the approval of a
huge tar sands mine expansion. The band is also challenging another Shell
project, the proposed Pierre River Mine, which it says “would significantly
impact lands, water, wildlife and the First Nation’s ability to utilize their
traditional territory.” Once again the mismatch is staggering. The ACFN, with
just over one thousand members and an operating budget of about $5 million, is
battling both the Canadian government and Shell, with its 92,000 employees
across more than seventy countries and 2013 global revenues of $451.2 billion.
Many communities see odds like these and, understandably, never even get in
the ring.25
It is this gap between rights and resources—between what the law says and
what impoverished people are able to force vastly more powerful entities to do
—that government and industry have banked on for years.

“Honour the Treaties”
What is changing is that many non-Native people are starting to realize that
Indigenous rights—if aggressively backed by court challenges, direct action, and
mass movements demanding that they be respected—may now represent the
most powerful barriers protecting all of us from a future of climate chaos.
Which is why, in many cases, the movements against extreme energy
extraction are becoming more than just battles against specific oil, gas, and coal
companies and more, even, than pro-democracy movements. They are opening
up spaces for a historical reconciliation between Indigenous peoples and nonNatives, who are finally understanding that, at a time when elected officials
have open disdain for basic democratic principles, Indigenous rights are not a
threat, but a tremendous gift. Because the original Indigenous treaty negotiators
in much of North America had the foresight to include language protecting
their right to continue living off their traditional lands, they bequeathed to all
residents of these and many other countries the legal tools to demand that our
governments refrain from finishing the job of flaying the planet.
And so, in communities where there was once only anger, jealousy, and
thinly veiled racism, there is now something new and unfamiliar. “We’re really
thankful for our First Nations partners in this struggle,” said Lionel Conant, a
property manager whose home in Fort St. James, British Columbia, is within
sight of the proposed Northern Gateway pipeline. “[They’ve] got the legal
weight to deal with [the pipeline] . . . because this is all unceded land.” In
Washington State, anti-coal activists talk about the treaty rights of the Lummi
as their “ace in the hole” should all other methods of blocking the export
terminals fail. In Montana, the Sierra Club’s Mike Scott told me bluntly, “I
don’t think people understand the political power Natives have as sovereign
nations, often because they lack the resources to exercise that power. They can
stop energy projects in a way we can’t.”26
In New Brunswick, Suzanne Patles, a Mi’kmaq woman involved in the antifracking movement, described how non-Natives “have reached out to the
Indigenous people to say ‘we need help.’ ”27 Which is something of a turnaround
from the saviorism and pitying charity that have poisoned relationships between
Indigenous peoples and well-meaning liberals for far too long.
It was in the context of this gradual shift in awareness that Idle No More
burst onto the political scene in Canada at the end of 2012 and then spread
quickly south of the border. North American shopping centers—from the

enormous West Edmonton Mall to Minnesota’s Mall of America—were
suddenly alive with the sounds of hand drums and jingle dresses as Indigenous
people held flash mob round dances across the continent at the peak of the
Christmas shopping season. In Canada, Native leaders went on hunger strikes,
and youths embarked on months-long spiritual walks and blockaded roads and
railways.
The movement was originally sparked by a series of attacks by the Canadian
government on Indigenous sovereignty, as well as its all-out assault on existing
environmental protections, particularly for water, to pave the way for rapid tar
sands expansion, more mega-mines, and projects like Enbridge’s Northern
Gateway pipeline. The attacks came in the form of two omnibus budget bills
passed in 2012 that gutted large parts of the country’s environmental regulatory
framework. As a result, a great many industrial activities were suddenly exempt
from federal environmental reviews, which along with other changes, greatly
reduced opportunities for community input and gave the intractable right-wing
government of Stephen Harper a virtual free hand to ram through unpopular
energy and development projects. The omnibus bills also overhauled key
provisions of the Navigable Waters Protection Act that protect species and
ecosystems from damage. Previously, virtually 100 percent of the country’s water
bodies had been covered by these protections; under the new order, that was
slashed to less than 1 percent, with pipelines simply exempted. (Documents
later revealed that the latter change had been specifically requested by the
pipeline industry.)28
Canadians were in shock at the extent and speed of the regulatory overhaul.
Most felt powerless, and with good reason: despite winning only 39.6 percent of
the popular vote, the Harper government had a majority in Parliament and
could apparently do as it pleased.29 But the First Nations’ response was not to
despair; it was to launch the Idle No More movement from coast to coast. These
laws, movement leaders said, were an attack on Indigenous rights to clean water
and to maintain traditional ways of life. Suddenly, the arguments that had been
made in local battles were being taken to the national level, now used against
sweeping federal laws. And for a time Idle No More seemed to change the game,
attracting support from across Canadian society, from trade unions to university
students, to the opinion pages of mainstream newspapers.
These coalitions of rights-rich-but-cash-poor people teaming up with
(relatively) cash-rich-but-rights-poor people carry tremendous political
potential. If enough people demand that governments honor the legal

commitments made to the people on whose land colonial nations were founded,
and do so with sufficient force, politicians interested in reelection won’t be able
to ignore them forever. And the courts, too—however much they may claim to
be above such influences—are inevitably shaped by the values of the societies in
which they function. A handful of courageous rulings notwithstanding, if an
obscure land right or treaty appears to be systematically ignored by the culture as
a whole, it will generally be treated tentatively by the courts. If, however, the
broader society takes those commitments seriously, then there is a far greater
chance that the courts will follow.I
As Idle No More gained steam, many investors took notice. “For the first
time in six years, Canadian provinces failed to top the list of the best mining
jurisdictions in the world in a 2012/13 survey,” Reuters reported in March 2013.
“Companies that participated in the survey said they were concerned about land
claims.” The article quoted Ewan Downie, chief executive of Premier Gold
Mines, which owns several projects in Ontario: “I would say one of the big
things that is weighing on mining investment in Canada right now is First
Nations issues.”30
Writing in The Guardian, journalist and activist Martin Lukacs observed that
Canadians seemed finally to be grasping that
implementing Indigenous rights on the ground, starting with the United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, could tilt the
balance of stewardship over a vast geography: giving Indigenous peoples
much more control, and corporations much less. Which means that
finally honoring Indigenous rights is not simply about paying off Canada’s
enormous legal debt to First Nations: it is also our best chance to save
entire territories from endless extraction and destruction. In no small way,
the actions of Indigenous peoples—and the decision of Canadians to
stand alongside them—will determine the fate of the planet.
This new understanding is dawning on more Canadians. Thousands are
signing onto educational campaigns to become allies to First Nations. . . .
Sustained action that puts real clout behind Indigenous claims is what
will force a reckoning with the true nature of Canada’s economy—and
the possibility of a transformed country. That is the promise of a growing
mass protest movement, an army of untold power and numbers.31

In short, the muscle able to turn rights into might that Standard & Poor’s
had been looking for in that meeting with Arthur Manuel and Guujaaw back in
2004 may have finally developed.
The power of this collaboration received another boost in January 2014
when the rock legend Neil Young kicked off a cross-Canada tour called
“Honour the Treaties.” He had visited the tar sands several months earlier and
been devastated by what he saw, saying (to much controversy) that the region
“looks like Hiroshima.” While in the region, he had met with Chief Allan
Adam of the Athabasca Chipewyan and heard about the lawsuits opposing
Shell’s tar sands expansions, as well as the health impacts current levels of oil
production are already having on the community. “I was sitting with the chief
in the teepee, on the reserve. I was hearing the stories. I saw that the cancer rate
was up among all the tribes. This is not a myth. This is true,” Young said.32
And he concluded that the best way he could contribute to the fight against
the tar sands was to help the Athabasca Chipewyan First Nation exercise its
rights in court. So he went on a concert tour, donating 100 percent of the
proceeds to the court challenges. In addition to raising $600,000 for their legal
battles within two months, the tour attracted unprecedented national attention
to both the local and global impacts of runaway tar sands development. The
prime minister’s office fought back by attacking one of Canada’s most beloved
icons, but it was a losing battle. Prominent Canadians spoke up to support the
campaign, and polls showed that even in Alberta a majority were taking Young’s
side in the dispute.33
Most importantly, the Honour the Treaties tour sparked a national discussion
about the duty to respect First Nation legal rights. “It’s up to Canadians all
across Canada to make up their own minds about whether their integrity is
threatened by a government that won’t live up to the treaties that this country
is founded on,” Young said. And the country heard directly from Chief Allan
Adam, who described the treaties his ancestors signed as “not just pieces of
paper but a last line of defense against encroaching reckless tar sands
development that my people don’t want and that we are already suffering
from.”34

The Moral Imperative of Economic Alternatives

Making the most of that last line of defense is a complex challenge involving
much more than rock concerts and having cash in hand to pay lawyers. The
deeper reason why more First Nations communities aren’t taking on companies
like Shell has to do with the systematic economic and social disenfranchisement
that makes doing business with heavily polluting oil or mining companies seem
like the only way to cover basic human needs. Yes, there is a desire to protect
the rivers, streams, and oceans for traditional fishing. But in Canada, according
to a 2011 government report, the water systems in 25 percent of First Nations
communities are so neglected and underfunded that they pose a “high overall
risk” to health, while thousands of residents of Native reserves are living
without sewage or running water at all. If you are the leader of one such
community, getting those basic services taken care of, no matter the cost, is very
likely going to supersede all other priorities. 35
And ironically, in many cases, climate change is further increasing the
economic pressure on Indigenous communities to make quick-and-dirty deals
with extractive industries. That’s because disruptive weather changes,
particularly in northern regions, are making it much harder to hunt and fish (for
example when the ice is almost never solid, communities in the far north
become virtually trapped, unable to harvest food for months on end). All this
makes it extremely hard to say no to offers of job training and resource sharing
when companies like Shell come to town. Members of these communities know
that the drilling will only make it harder to engage in subsistence activities—
there are real concerns about the effects of oil development on the migration of
whales, walruses, and caribou—and that’s without the inevitable spills. But
precisely because the ecology is already so disrupted by climate change, there
often seems no other option.
The paucity of good choices is perhaps best on display in Greenland, where
receding glaciers and melting ice are revealing a vast potential for new mines
and offshore oil exploration. The former Danish colony gained home rule in
1979, but the Inuit nation still relies on an annual infusion of more than $600
million (amounting to a full third of the economy) from Denmark. A 2008 selfgovernance referendum gave Greenland still more control over its own affairs,
but also put it firmly on the path of drilling and mining its way to full
independence. “We’re very aware that we’ll cause more climate change by
drilling for oil,” a top Greenlandic official, then heading the Office of SelfGovernance, said in 2008. “But should we not? Should we not when it can buy
us our independence?” Currently, Greenland’s largest industry is fishing, which

of course would be devastated by a major spill. And it doesn’t bode well that one
of the companies selected to begin developing Greenland’s estimated fifty
billion barrels of offshore oil and gas is none other than BP.36
Indeed the melancholy dynamic strongly recalls BP’s “vessels of opportunity”
program launched in the midst of the Deepwater Horizon disaster. For months,
virtually the entire Louisiana fishing fleet was docked, unable to make a living
for fear that the seafood was unsafe. That’s when BP offered to convert any
fishing vessel into a cleanup boat, providing it with booms to (rather uselessly)
mop up some oil. It was tremendously difficult for local shrimpers and oystermen
to take work from the company that had just robbed them of their livelihood—
but what choice did they have? No one else was offering to help pay the bills.
This is the way the oil and gas industry holds on to power: by tossing temporary
life rafts to the people it is drowning.
That many Indigenous people would view the extractive industries as their
best of a series of bad options should not be surprising. There has been almost
no other economic development in most Native communities, no one else
offering jobs or skills training in any quantity. So in virtually every community
on the front lines of extractive battles, some faction invariably makes the
argument that it’s not up to Indigenous people to sacrifice to save the rest of the
world from climate change, that they should concentrate instead on getting
better deals from the mining and oil companies so that they can pay for basic
services and train their young people in marketable skills. Jim Boucher, chief of
the Fort McKay First Nation, whose lands have been decimated by the Alberta
tar sands, told an oil-industry-sponsored conference in 2014, “There is no more
opportunity for our people to be employed or have some benefits except the oil
sands”—going so far as to call the mines the “new trap line,” a reference to the
fur trade that once drove the economics of the region.37
Sadly, this argument has created rancorous divisions and families are often
torn apart over whether to accept industry deals or to uphold traditional
teachings. And as the offers from industry become richer (itself a sign of
Blockadia’s growing power), those who are trying to hold the line too often feel
they have nothing to offer their people but continued impoverishment. As
Phillip Whiteman Jr., a traditional Northern Cheyenne storyteller and longtime
opponent of coal development, told me, “I can’t keep asking my people to suffer
with me.”38
These circumstances raise troubling moral questions for the rising Blockadia
movement, which is increasingly relying on Indigenous people to be the legal

barrier to new, high-carbon projects. It’s fine and well to laud treaty and title
rights as the “last line of defense” against fossil fuel extraction. But if nonNative people are going to ask some of the poorest, most systematically
disenfranchised people on the planet to be humanity’s climate saviors, then, to
put it crassly, what are we going to do for them? How can this relationship not
be yet another extractive one, in which non-Natives use hard-won Indigenous
rights but give nothing or too little in return? As the experience with carbon
offsets shows, there are plenty of examples of new “green” relationships
replicating old patterns. Large NGOs often use Indigenous groups for their legal
standing, picking up some of the costs for expensive legal battles but not doing
much about the underlying issues that force so many Indigenous communities to
take these deals in the first place. Unemployment stays sky high. Options, for
the most part, stay bleak.
If this situation is going to change, then the call to Honour the Treaties
needs to go a whole lot further than raising money for legal battles. NonNatives will have to become the treaty and land-sharing partners that our
ancestors failed to be, making good on the full panoply of promises they made,
from providing health care and education to creating economic opportunities
that do not jeopardize the right to engage in traditional ways of life. Because the
only people who will be truly empowered to say no to dirty development over
the long term are people who see real, hopeful alternatives. And this is true not
just within wealthy countries but between the countries of the wealthy
postindustrial North and the fast-industrializing South.

I. Indeed, it may be no coincidence that in June 2014, the Supreme Court of Canada issued what may be
its most significant indigenous rights ruling to date when it granted the Tsilhqot’in Nation a declaration of
Aboriginal title to 1,750 square kilometers of land in British Columbia. The unanimous decision laid out
that ownership rights included the right to use the land, to decide how the land should be used by others,
and to derive economic benefit from the land. Government, it also stated, must meet certain standards
before stepping in, and seek not only consultation with First Nations, but consent from them. Many
commented that it would make the construction of controversial projects like tar sands pipelines—rejected
by local First Nations—significantly more difficult.

12

SHARING THE SKY
The Atmospheric Commons and the Power of Paying Our Debts
“The forest is already ‘developed,’ the forest is life.”
—Franco Viteri, Sarayaku leader, Ecuador1

“How, in the North, could anything like this ever be possible? How, given the madness that
has come upon the wealthy countries, one in which ideologues and elites have cast a
mythology of ‘debt crisis’ and ‘bitter medicine’ and ‘austerity’ over all claims to the
commonwealth, could the North ever accept the necessity of large-scale financial and
technological investments in a climate mobilisation, including massive support to the
South? . . . How, given the North’s fear of a rising Asia, and its stubborn insistence that the
South is both unwilling and unable to restrain its own emissions, will the North ever come
to see the implacability of the logic—the fear of a foreclosed future—which most deeply
animates the South’s negotiators? And how, given that the North’s blindness on these
points is an almost perfect, ready-made excuse for its own continued free-riding, can there
be any path to rapidly increased global ambition that does not begin in the North?”
—Sivan Kartha, Tom Athanasiou, and Paul Baer, climate researchers, 20122

I saw this new kind of partnership in action while reporting on one of the
highest-stakes fronts of the fossil fuel wars, in southeastern Montana. There,
underneath the rolling hills dotted with cattle, horses, and otherworldly
sandstone rock formations, sits a whole lot of coal. So much that you can see it
in seams on the side of the road. The region has enough coal to supply current
levels of U.S. consumption for nearly two hundred years.3 Indeed, much of the
coal that the industry plans to export to China would come from mines
presently planned for this part of the world, all of it impacting, in one form or

another, the Northern Cheyenne. The industry wants the coal under and near
their reservation, and, as discussed, it wants to build a railroad skirting their
reservation to get that coal out—which, together with the mine, would threaten
the Tongue River, a key water source.
The Northern Cheyenne have been fighting off the mining companies since
the early 1970s, in part due to an important Sweet Medicine prophecy that is
often interpreted to mean that digging up the “black rock” would bring on a
kind of madness and the end of Cheyenne culture. But when I first visited the
reserve in 2010, the region was in the throes of the fossil fuel frenzy, getting hit
from every direction—and it wasn’t clear how long the community’s anti-coal
forces were going to be able to hold out.
After an ugly battle, coal opponents had just lost a crucial vote at the State
Land Board about the proposed new coal mine at Otter Creek, just outside the
boundaries of the Northern Cheyenne Reservation (this was the site visited by
the Lummi carvers on their ceremonial totem pole journey). Otter Creek was
the biggest new coal mine under consideration in the United States, and at this
point it seemed certain to go ahead. Attention was shifting to opposing the
construction of the artery needed to get the coal out of the mine, the proposed
Tongue River Railroad—which would likely impact Cheyenne burial grounds.
Like the tar sands pipelines, it had become a “chokepoint” battle: without the
railroad, there would be no hope of getting the coal out, and therefore no point
in building the new mine.
But back in 2010, the railroad fight hadn’t succeeded in galvanizing the
Northern Cheyenne in opposition and it also looked likely to go ahead.
Meanwhile, on the neighboring Crow Reservation, there was a plan to build a
coal-to-liquids plant, a noxious process that turns coal rock into a highly
polluting form of liquid fuel, which emits twice as much carbon as regular
gasoline when burned. The Australian company behind the plant, which called
the project “Many Stars,” had commissioned a famous Crow artist to create its
logo: two tepees against a starry sky.4
The Sierra Club’s Mike Scott described his work to me as “triage”—racing to
try to stop or slow one terrible idea after another. His partner, Alexis
Bonogofsky, told me at the time, “There is so much going on, people don’t know
what to fight.”5 From their goat ranch outside Billings, the pair would go off in
different directions every day, trying to beat back yet another offensive in the
fossil fuel frenzy.

Bonogofsky’s official job tittle is “tribal lands program manager” for the
National Wildlife Federation, which in practice meant helping Indigenous
tribes exercise their legal rights in order to protect the land, air, and water. The
tribe with whom she was working most closely was the Northern Cheyenne,
both because they were in the bull’s-eye of new coal development and because
they had a long history of using the law for land stewardship. For instance, the
Northern Cheyenne broke legal ground by arguing that their right to enjoy a
traditional way of life included the right to breathe clean air. In 1977, the EPA
agreed and granted the Northern Cheyenne Reservation the highest possible
classification for its air quality (called Class I under the Clean Air Act). This
seemingly bureaucratic technicality allowed the tribe to argue in court that
polluting projects as far away as Wyoming were a violation of its treaty rights,
since the pollutants could travel to the Northern Cheyenne Reservation and
potentially compromise its air and water quality.
Bonogofsky, in her familiar plaid flannel shirts and cowboy boots, was
spending many hours a week in her white pickup truck, driving from the ranch
to Lame Deer, the small, scrubby town at the center of the Northern Cheyenne
Reservation. There, more often than not, she would end up in the converted
Mormon church that houses the tribe’s environmental protection offices,
meeting and scheming with the department’s tough and tireless director,
Charlene Alden.
Alden has been an anchor of the Northern Cheyenne’s long battle against
coal and she has won some major victories, like stopping the dumping of
untreated wastewater from coal bed methane directly into the Tongue River.
But when we met, she wasn’t sure how much longer she could hold off the promining forces.
The problems were as much internal as external. The tribe had elected a
former coal miner as tribal president and he was determined to open up the
lands to the extractive industries. On the day I arrived, pink flyers had appeared
on the community bulletin board announcing that in the elections coming up
in ten days, tribal members would be polled on their views about developing the
reservation’s coal and methane.
Charlene Alden was furious about the flyers. The wording was biased, and
she said the process violated several election rules. But she also knew why some
of her people were tempted to take the money. Tribal unemployment was as
high as 62 percent, and by some estimates significantly higher. Substance abuse
was ravaging the reservation (a mural at the center of town depicted crystal

meth as an evil-eyed green snake being fought off with sacred arrows). And
these problems had been plaguing the community for a very long time. In 1995,
Alden made a video that aired on the ABC current affairs program Day One,
cohosted by Diane Sawyer, which for its time was a breakthrough in Indigenous
representation on network television. Formatted as a video journal, the piece
was a meditation on historical trauma that showed shocking footage of Alden’s
own sister drinking the toxic cleaning liquid Lysol out of a plastic jug;
“Cheyenne champagne,” it was called.6
It was desperation like that which made it possible for mining companies like
Arch and Peabody to gain a ready audience when they sailed into town
promising jobs and money to fund new social programs. “People say we have
high unemployment, we have no tax base. If we go ahead and do this we can
have good schools, a good waste system,” Alden told me. And there is no
question that “the tribal government has no money at all.” But she worried that
sacrificing the health of the land for coal dollars would only further alienate
Cheyenne people from their culture and traditions, very likely causing more
depression and abuse, not less. “In Cheyenne, the word for water is the same as
the word for life,” she said. “We know that if we start messing around too much
with coal, it destroys life.”7
The only way to break the deadlock, Alden had come to believe, was to
prove to the next generation of Cheyenne leaders that there is another path out
of poverty and hopelessness—one that does not involve handing over the land
for which their ancestors paid so dearly.
And she saw no end to the possibilities. As we were speaking, a colleague
popped into Alden’s office and told her that someone had broken into the
building the night before and stolen an electric heater. Alden was not surprised.
It was fall, the nighttime temperatures were dropping, and rez houses are
notoriously drafty, most of them having been built from government-issue kits
in the 1940s and 1950s. You can see the hinges connecting the walls. Residents
blast the heat (even turn on their ovens for backup) only to have it fly through
the cracks in the walls, windows, and doors. As a result, heating bills are
staggeringly high—$400 a month is average, but I met people with bills that
topped $1,000 in winter. And since the heat was coming from coal and propane,
it was contributing to the climate crisis that was already hitting this region hard,
with persistent droughts and massive wildfires.
To Alden, everything was wrong with that picture—the expensive bills, the
crummy housing, the dirty energy source. And it all pointed to the tremendous

untapped opportunities for models of development that respect, rather than
violate, Cheyenne values. For instance, the converted church where we were
sitting had just been fitted with new windows as part of an energy conservation
program and Alden was thrilled with the results: the new windows saved
heating costs, let in more natural light, and installing them had created jobs for
community members. But the scale was so small. Why couldn’t there be a
program to install windows like these in all the houses on the reservation?
An NGO had come in a few years ago and built a handful of model homes
made of straw bale, an ancient form of architecture that keeps buildings cool in
summer and warm in winter. Today, Alden reported with some amazement,
those families had minuscule electricity bills—“$19 a month instead of $400!”
But she couldn’t see why the tribe needed outsiders to build homes that are
based on Indigenous knowledge. Why not train tribal members to design and
build them and get funding to do it across the reservation? There would be a
green building boom in no time and the trainees could use their skills elsewhere
too. Montana, meanwhile, provides excellent conditions for both wind and
rooftop solar.
This takes money though, and money is what the Northern Cheyenne do not
have. There had been hopes that President Obama would significantly increase
funding for green jobs in disadvantaged communities, but those plans had
mostly been shelved in the wake of the economic crisis. Bonogofsky, however,
was convinced that finding ways to help the Northern Cheyenne fulfill their
aspirations for real economic alternatives to coal was just as important as
helping to pay for their anti-coal lawsuits. So she and Alden got to work.
About a year after my visit to the church, Bonogofsky called to say that they
had managed to scrape together some money—from the Environmental
Protection Agency and from her own NGO—for an exciting new project.
Henry Red Cloud, a Lakota social entrepreneur who had won awards for his
work bringing wind and solar power to the Pine Ridge Reservation in South
Dakota, was going to teach a group of about a dozen Northern Cheyenne to
install solar heaters on their reservation homes. The heaters are worth $2,000
each and they would be going in for free, cutting heating bills by as much as
half. Did I want to come back to Montana?

The Sun Comes Out

My return trip could not have been more different from the first. It was spring of
2011 and those gentle hills around the reservation were now covered in tiny
yellow wildflowers that somehow made the grass look videogame green. The
trainings were already under way and about fifteen people had gathered on the
lawn of a home to learn how a simple box made mostly of dark glass could
capture enough heat to warm an entire house.
Red Cloud, a natural leader with a gift for making his courses feel like a
meeting of friends, effortlessly wove technical lessons about passive solar systems
with meditations about how “solar power was always part of Natives’ way of life.
Everything followed the anpetuwi tawonawaka, the life-giving force of the sun. It
ties in with our culture, our ceremony, our language, our songs.”8
Each installation began with Red Cloud walking around the house holding
up a pocket Solar Pathfinder that told him where the sun would hit on every
day of the year. The solar boxes are placed on the sides of the buildings and
need at least six hours of daily radiant sunlight to run effectively. A couple of
houses were nestled too tightly against trees and mountains to make them
strong candidates. For these, roof panels might be used instead, or another
power source entirely.
Red Cloud, a former metalworker who used to earn his living on large
industrial sites, clearly enjoyed this flexible aspect to renewable power; he called
the fiddling and adapting he does “Indianizing” and reminisced about building
his first wind turbine out of a 1978 Chevy Blazer that was rusting on the rez.
Watching him pace around these homes, a twinkle in his eye, it struck me that
this need to adapt to nature is what drives some people mad about renewables:
even at a very large scale, they require a humility that is the antithesis of
damming a river, blasting bedrock for gas, or harnessing the power of the atom.
They demand that we adapt ourselves to the rhythms of natural systems, as
opposed to bending those systems to our will with brute force engineering. Put
another way, if extractive energy sources are NFL football players, bashing away
at the earth, then renewables are surfers, riding the swells as they come, but
doing some pretty fancy tricks along the way.
It was precisely this need to adapt ourselves to nature that James Watt’s
steam engine purportedly liberated us from in the late 1770s, when it freed
factory owners from having to find the best waterfalls, and ship captains from
worrying about the prevailing winds. As Andreas Malm writes, the first
commercial steam engine “was appreciated for having no ways or places of its
own, no external laws, no residual existence outside that brought forth by its

proprietors; it was absolutely, indeed ontologically subservient to those who
owned it.”9
It is this powerfully seductive illusion of total control that a great many
boosters of extractive energy are so reluctant to relinquish. Indeed at the climate
change denial conference hosted by the Heartland Institute, renewables were
derided as “sunbeams and friendly breezes”—the subtext was clear: real men
burn coal.10 And there is no doubt that moving to renewables represents more
than just a shift in power sources but also a fundamental shift in power relations
between humanity and the natural world on which we depend. The power of
the sun, wind, and waves can be harnessed, to be sure, but unlike fossil fuels,
those forces can never be fully possessed by us. Nor do the same rules work
everywhere.
So now we find ourselves back where we started, in dialogue with nature.
Proponents of fossil and nuclear energy constantly tell us that renewables are
not “reliable,” by which they mean that they require us to think closely about
where we live, to pay attention to things like when the sun shines and when the
wind blows, where and when rivers are fierce and where they are weak.I And it’s
true: renewables, at least the way Henry Red Cloud sees them, require us to
unlearn the myth that we are the masters of nature—the “God Species”—and
embrace the fact that we are in relationship with the rest of the natural world.
But ours is a new level of relationship, one based on an understanding of nature
that far surpasses anything our pre–fossil fuel ancestors could have imagined.
We know enough to know how much we will never know, yet enough to find
ingenious ways to amplify the systems provided by nature in what feminist
historian Carolyn Merchant has described as a “partnership ethic.”11
It is this collaborative quality that resonated most powerfully with Red
Cloud’s students. Landon Means, a recent college grad who had just moved back
to the reservation, told me that he saw in solar energy a shift in worldview that
was about “working synergistically” with the earth, “instead of just using it.”
This insight seemed to hit hardest with the young Cheyenne men who had
spent time working in the coal industry and were tired of suppressing core parts
of their identity to earn a paycheck. During the lunch break on the first day of
the training, Jeff King, one of the Cheyenne students, confessed that he was still
working in Gillette, Wyoming—ground zero of the Powder River Basin coal
boom. He described it balefully as the “carbon capital of the world” and clearly
wanted out. He hadn’t intended to drive trucks to coal mines for a living; a
decade ago he had been one of the most promising Cheyenne students of his

generation and had gone to Dartmouth on scholarship to study art, which he
describes as “a calling.” But the coal boom sucked him in. Now, he said, he
wasn’t sure how he could go back to Gillette. He huddled with a couple of
friends to discuss starting their own solar company to serve the reservation.12
One of the last houses to get a solar air heater was on a busy street in
downtown Lame Deer. As Red Cloud’s students measured, drilled, and
hammered, they started to draw a crowd. Kids gathered to watch the action. Old
women asked what was going on. “Half the cost of electricity? Really? How do I
get one?”
Red Cloud smiled. This is his marketing strategy for building a solar
revolution in Indian Country. The first step, he says, it to get “a few solar panels
over on Grandma’s house. Everyone sees Grandma and says, ‘What is that? I
want that too.’ ” Alexis Bonogofsky, meanwhile, beamed from the sidelines.
“This has been probably the best week I have ever had at this job—it felt
different,” she told me as the training wrapped up. “It feels like something has
changed.”13
In the coming months, several members of the initial group continued to train
with Red Cloud and others joined them, making pilgrimages to his school, the
Red Cloud Renewable Energy Center on the Pine Ridge Reservation. Jeff King
quit his coal job in Gillette and set about getting a solar business off the ground.
The money wasn’t as good but, he said, “I have a direction now.”
One of Red Cloud’s star students turned out to be a twenty-nine-year-old
woman named Vanessa Braided Hair, who more than held her own with the
power tools in the mostly male class. She worked seasonally as a firefighter for
the Bureau of Indian Affairs and in the summer of 2012 battled an
unprecedented wildfire that burned over 230 square kilometers (90 square
miles) and destroyed nineteen homes on the Northern Cheyenne Reservation
alone. (As the Associated Press reported at the time, the fire “ripped through as
if the land had been doused with gasoline.”) Braided Hair did not need anyone
to tell her that climate change was an existential crisis and welcomed the
chance to contribute to the solution. But it went deeper than that. Solar power,
she said, embodied the worldview in which she had been raised, one in which
“You don’t take and take and take. And you don’t consume and consume and
consume. You take what you need and then you put back into the land.”14

Red Cloud tells his students that deriving energy in a way that heals and
protects the natural world is not just about employment. It’s a continuation of
“what the ancestors shed blood for, always fought for—the earth.” And he says
he is training them not just to be technicians but to be “solar warriors.”15
I confess that when I first heard that I thought it was another example of Red
Cloud’s marketing flair. But in the months and years that followed, I watched
his prediction come true in the lives of the young people he had taught. In
2012, with his training still under way, the fight against the mines and the coal
train on the Northern Cheyenne Reservation—the fight that had seemed all
but lost in 2010—sprang back to life. Suddenly there was no shortage of
Cheyennes willing to hold protests, demand meetings with regulators, or make
impassioned speeches at hearings. And Red Cloud’s solar warriors were front
and center, dressed in red “Beyond Coal” T-shirts and declaring themselves
“Idle No More,” a reference to the movement that had started in Canada and
had swept through Indigenous communities across the continent.
At a technical hearing for the proposed massive coal mine at Otter Creek,
Vanessa Braided Hair pulled no punches: “I want you to know that many people
do not see any difference between your agency and Arch Coal,” she told a panel
of squirming officials, including the head of Montana’s Department of
Environmental Quality. Lucas King, twenty-eight, and another Red Cloud
student, told a different hearing on the Otter Creek mine, “This is Cheyenne
country. It has been for a long time, longer than any dollar has ever lasted. I
don’t expect you guys to understand us. You don’t. And I’m not saying I
understand you. But I know you guys understand ‘no.’ ” He concluded his
remarks by saying: “Please go back and tell whoever you have to that we don’t
want it. It’s not for us. Thank you.” The room broke out in applause. A new
generation of warriors had been born.16
Today, the mood among dirty-energy opponents in southeastern Montana is
positively jubilant. They speak about “when” they will stop the railroad, not if.
Which, if true, means the Otter Creek mine cannot proceed. And there is far
less talk of mining on the Cheyenne Reservation itself. The plan for a coal-toliquid plant on the Crow Reservation is also dead. Mike Scott from the Sierra
Club has been working with Crow members on building a wind farm.
What this part of the world has clearly shown is that there is no more potent
weapon in the battle against fossil fuels than the creation of real alternatives.
Just the glimpse of another kind of economy can be enough to energize the fight
against the old one. There are also powerful precedents for this: in two of the

countries with the largest commitment to decentralized, community-controlled
renewable power—Denmark and Germany—these energy victories trace their
roots back to the antinuclear movement. In both countries, communities were
forcefully opposed to the risks associated with nuclear power plants, but they
knew that to win, they needed an alternative. So instead of just saying no, they
demanded government policies that would allow the communities in question
to generate their own clean power and earn revenue in the process. Large-scale
victories like these, however, are hard to achieve when the communities lack
political power. It’s clear from the European examples that renewable energy
can be a viable alternative to extraction for Indigenous people around the
world; it can provide skills training, jobs, and steady revenue streams for
impoverished communities. But opportunities are consistently lost.
For instance, the Black Mesa Water Coalition, founded in 2001 by a group of
Navajo and Hopi youth in Arizona, won a pivotal battle in 2005 when it helped
shut down the notoriously polluting Mohave Generating Station as well as the
Black Mesa Mine. But coal mining and coal-power generation continue on
Navajo territory, helping to light up and pump water to large stretches of
Arizona, including Phoenix, along with parts of Nevada and California. The
mining puts the water supply at risk but the Black Mesa activists know that
there is no hope of shutting it all down until they are able to provide tangible
alternatives to their people. So in 2010, they came up with a highly detailed
proposal to convert land that the mining industry had abandoned, land still
likely contaminated and depleted, and use it to host vast solar arrays that could
power not just their reservation but also large urban centers. Since the
infrastructure and transmission lines are already in place, thanks to the coal
industry, it would be just a matter of converting the power source. As Jihan
Gearon, executive director of the coalition, puts it, “Why not turn those lands
into something positive that could bring in monetary income to the people who
live in that region and begin that transition away from coal?” But under this
plan, the Navajos—not an outside multinational energy company—would be
the owners of the power they produced and sold to the grid. And the money
generated would be able to support traditional economies, such as Navajo
weaving. That is what made the plan different: this time, the arrangement
would be nonextractive in every sense—the poisons would stay in the ground,
and the money and skills would stay in the community.17
Yet half a decade later, this elegant plan is still struggling to get off the
ground. As always, a major barrier has been funding. And that is a problem not

only for Black Mesa but for everyone concerned about climate change—because
if the Navajo cannot show that clean energy can provide a route out of poverty
and toward real self-determination, then the coal mining will continue, to
everyone’s detriment. Part of the job of the climate movement, then, is to make
the moral case that the communities who have suffered most from unjust
resource relationships should be first to be supported in their efforts to build the
next, life-based economy now.
And that means a fundamentally new relationship, in which those
communities have full control over resource projects, so that they become
opportunities for skills training, jobs, and steady revenues (rather than one-off
payments). This point needs to be stressed because far too many large-scale
renewable energy projects are being imposed on Native lands without proper
consultation and consent, replicating old colonial patterns in which profits (and
skills and jobs) go to outsiders. The shift from one power system to another must
be more than a mere flipping of a switch from underground to aboveground. It
must be accompanied by a power correction in which the old injustices that
plague our societies are righted once and for all. That’s how you build an army
of solar warriors.
The need to provide tangible economic alternatives to extraction is not only
pressing in Native communities, of course. The impossible choices faced by the
Navajo Nation and the Northern Cheyenne are intensified versions of the same
nonchoices offered to a great many low-income communities where the present
is so difficult and the pressures to provide the basics of life are so great that
focusing on the future can seem like an impossible luxury. Holding on to family
farms in the face of fierce competition from Big Ag, for instance, is so tough that
there is never any shortage of farmers and ranchers willing to make some extra
money by leasing land to fracking or pipeline companies—even if that means
going to war with their neighbors who oppose these practices, and even if it
means imperiling their own water supply and livestock. Desperate people do
desperate things.
The same goes for many of the workers who want to build those pipelines,
frack that gas, or work in polluting refineries. Manufacturing in North America
is as battered as family farming, which means that well-paying union jobs are so
scarce that people will fight for whatever jobs are on offer, no matter how
dangerous, precarious, or polluting to themselves, their families, or their own

communities. The solution, as the more visionary sectors of the labor movement
understand, is to fight for policies that do not force workers to make those kinds
of choices.
For instance, a 2012 study from the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives
compared the public value from a $5 billion pipeline—the rough cost of
Enbridge’s Northern Gateway—and the value that could be derived from
investing the same amount in green economic alternatives. It found that if $5
billion is spent on a pipeline, it produces mostly short-term construction jobs,
big private sector profits, and heavy public costs for future environmental
damage. But if $5 billion is spent on public transit, building retrofits, and
renewable energy, economies can gain, at the very least, three times as many
jobs in the short term, while simultaneously helping to reduce the chances of
catastrophic warming in the long term. In fact, the number of jobs could be
many times more than that, according to the institute’s modeling. At the
highest end, green investment could create thirty-four times more jobs than just
building another pipeline.18
The problem, of course, is that while companies like Enbridge are putting
dollars on the table to build pipelines, governments are unwilling to make
comparable sums available for these alternatives. And yet in Canada a minimal
national carbon tax of $10 a ton would raise $5 billion a year, the sum in
question—and unlike a one-off pipeline investment, it would do so year after
year.19 If policy options like that were on the table, the jobs vs. environment
dichotomy would all but evaporate.
Which is another reason why today’s climate movement does not have the
luxury of simply saying no without simultaneously fighting for a series of
transformative yeses—the building blocks of our next economy that can provide
good clean jobs, as well as a social safety net that cushions the hardships for
those inevitably suffering losses.

Don’t Just Divest, Reinvest
As discussed, the resources for this just transition must ultimately come from the
state, collected from the profits of the fossil fuel companies in the brief window
left while they are still profitable. But until a shift in the political tides makes
that necessity a reality, there are ways to start funneling much needed resources
to the next economy right now. This is shaping up to be the most exciting

aspect of the growing fossil fuel divestment movement: increasingly, participants
aren’t just calling on public interest institutions like colleges and municipalities
to sell their holdings in the companies that are wrecking the planet, they are
also asking them to reinvest that money in entities that have a clear vision for
the healing process.
Dan Apfel, former head of the Responsible Endowments Coalition, and a key
advisor to the movement, argues that “our colleges, other charities, pension
funds, and foundations must be the ones to lead the way.” He points out, “Five
percent of the money in these public purpose and publicly related institutions
adds up to about $400 billion. Four hundred billion dollars in new investments
could stimulate real climate solutions, help create the market for further
investments, encourage policy change and sustain financial returns long into the
future.”20
Already, the group of foundations and wealthy individuals that has joined
the fossil fuel divestment movement (see page 357) has taken the additional
step of moving the funds that had been profiting from fossil fuel companies and
reinvesting them in the clean tech sector (the intiative has become known as
“Divest-Invest”). Some colleges are taking a similar approach. As economic
analysts Jeremy Brecher, Brendan Smith, and Kristen Sheeran note, “Duke
University in North Carolina has invested $8 million in the Self-Help Credit
Union, in part to fund affordable green housing. Carleton College in Minnesota
and Miami University in Florida are directing investment into renewable energy
funds.”21
These big investors are taking a solid first step; even better would be if they
dedicated a share of their investments to projects that go deeper: not just
switching from brown energy to green energy but supporting cutting-edge
projects that are designed to bolster local economies, improve public transit, and
otherwise strengthen the starved public sphere. Critically, smart reinvestment
strategies can even give the communities at the front lines of fossil fuel
extraction the economic tools they need to resist carbon pollution at source—
like the Black Mesa Water Coalition’s plan for a municipal-scale solar utility, or
the solar co-ops employing growing numbers of African American and Latino
workers in Richmond, California, who might otherwise see no option besides
the Chevron refinery. Brecher, Smith, and Sheeran elaborate on these kinds of
creative possibilities for how the divestment movement can “leverage its power
to build a new sustainable economy for both the planet and local communities”:

Institutions should think in much more positive terms: How can their
money maximize the transition to a new sustainable economy? Here’s one
place to start: There are hundreds of community investment funds,
socially oriented banks and credit unions, union pension funds, and other
financial vehicles that have long experience in investing for social
purposes. There are thousands of co-ops, worker-and community-owned
businesses, non-profits, municipal initiatives, and other enterprises that
are engaged on a small scale in creating a new economy.
These are the elements of a growing sector of enterprises devoted to
public purposes with augmented control by workers and employees. They
are insulating and solarizing buildings; expanding public transportation;
developing low-carbon equipment and techniques for schools and
hospitals; developing new recycling systems for handling waste. They are
thereby also creating community-based economies that provide economic
security, empower local and workplace democracy, and ward off the
running away of jobs. But this is a sector that is generally starved for
capital. Expanding the resources to grow this sector as rapidly as possible
should be a priority for divestors.22
The main power of divestment is not that it financially harms Shell and
Chevron in the short term but that it erodes the social license of fossil fuel
companies and builds pressure on politicians to introduce across-the-board
emission reductions. That pressure, in turn, increases suspicions in the
investment community that fossil fuel stocks are overvalued. The benefit of an
accompanying reinvestment strategy, or a visionary investment strategy from
the start, is that it has the potential to turn the screws on the industry much
tighter, strengthening the renewable energy sector so that it is better able to
compete directly with fossil fuels, while bolstering the frontline land defenders
who need to be able to offer real economic alternatives to their communities.
All of this points to something else that sets Blockadia apart from many
previous social movements of its kind. In the past, people committed to social
change often believed they had to choose between fighting the system and
building alternatives to it. So in the 1960s, the counterculture splintered
between those who stayed in cities to try to stop wars and bash away at
inequalities and those who chose to drop out and live their ecological values
among like-minded people on organic farms or in manageable-sized cities like
Bellingham, Washington. The activists and the exodus.

Today’s activists don’t have the luxury of these choices even if they wanted
them. During these times of continual economic stress and exclusion, the
communities on the front lines of saying no to dirty energy have discovered that
they will never build the base they need unless they can simultaneously provide
economic alternatives to the projects they are opposing. So after three years of
just saying no to the Keystone XL pipeline, a group of farmers in Nebraska came
up with just such a strategy: they built a barn, powered by wind and solar, in the
pipeline’s path. And they pointed out that the power generated from just that
one barn would bring more energy to the region than the oil in the pipeline that
was headed for the export terminal in Texas.23 On one level, the Build Our
Energy Barn was just PR: the farmers were daring President Obama to tear down
a renewable energy installation to make way for dirty oil. But it also showed
their neighbors that, if the right policies are in place, there is another way to
earn some much needed extra income without putting their land at risk.
Similarly, after the British village of Balcombe in West Sussex was the site of
huge anti-fracking protests and angry clashes in 2013, a new power company
formed called REPOWERBalcombe. Its goal is “to supply the equivalent of
100% of Balcombe’s electricity demand through community owned, locally
generated renewable energy”—with financing coming from residents buying
shares in the energy cooperative. The fracking fight continues to play out in the
courts, but solar panels are already on their way and residents who were
originally in favor of oil and gas drilling are joining the co-op, attracted to the
promise of self-sufficiency and cost-saving.24 A comparable process is underway
in Pungesti, the Romanian farming community fighting fracking. The claims by
Chevron’s supporters that gas extraction is the only option for jobs in this poor
region of the country forced fracking opponents to put forward proposals of their
own—like a community wind farm, a processing plant for the vegetables grown
locally, and an abattoir for their livestock, all of which would add value to the
livelihoods that are the region’s heritage.
In short, some of the most tangible responses to the ecological crisis today
come not from utopian dropout projects, but rather are being forged in the
flames of resistance, by communities on the front lines of the battles against
extreme extraction. And at the same time, many of those who, decades ago,
built alternatives at the local level are finding themselves forced back to the
barricades. That’s because many of the most idyllic pockets where the sixties-era
dropouts went to build their utopias are suddenly under siege: oil and coal

tankers threaten their shores, oil and coal trains threaten their downtowns, and
frackers want their land.
And even in places that are lucky enough to have been spared (so far) all
these threats, climate change is demolishing the idea that any countercultural
pocket can provide a safe haven. In August 2011, that became clear to the
organic farmers in Vermont who had pioneered one of the most advanced and
sustainable local agriculture systems in North America. Probably most famous is
the Intervale, a network of urban farms in Burlington that supplies roughly 10
percent of the city’s fresh food, while at the same time composting its waste and
sustainably generating a significant portion of its power. But when Hurricane
Irene descended on the state, floodwaters destroyed not only historic covered
bridges but as Bill McKibben, a Vermonter and staunch supporter of food
localization, said to me shortly after, “It washed away huge amounts of that
beautiful local agriculture. The Intervale in Burlington is suddenly under five
feet of water. Nothing gets harvested there. There are tons of farms where the
beautiful, rich topsoil is now just covered with feet of sand from the river.” He
took away from that experience the fact that “If we can’t solve the climate
problem, then all the rest of this is for naught.”25
I witnessed something similar, if on a smaller scale, in New York City one
year later in the immediate aftermath of Superstorm Sandy. While visiting Red
Hook, Brooklyn, one of the hardest hit neighborhoods, I stopped by the Red
Hook Community Farm—an amazing place that teaches kids from nearby
housing projects how to grow healthy food, provides composting for a huge
number of residents, hosts a weekly farmer’s market, and runs a Community
Supported Agriculture (CSA) program, getting all kinds of produce to people
who need it. Not only was the farm improving the lives of people in the
neighborhood, it was also doing everything right from a climate perspective—
reducing food miles; staying away from petroleum inputs; sequestering carbon in
the soil; reducing landfill by composting. But when the storm came, none of
that mattered. The entire fall harvest was lost. And the urban farmers I met
there—still in shock from seeing so much collective work gone to waste—were
preoccupied with the fear that the water that had inundated the fields had been
so toxic that they would need to bring in new soil.
In short, dropping out and planting vegetables is not an option for this
generation. There can be no more green museums because the fossil fuels
runaway train is coming for us one way or another. There may have been a time
when engaging in resistance against a life-threatening system and building

alternatives to that system could be meaningfully separated, but today we have
to do both simultaneously: build and support inspiring alternatives like the Red
Hook Community Farm—and make sure they have a fighting chance of thriving
by trying to change an economic model so treacherous that nowhere is safe.
John Jordan, a longtime ecological activist in Britain and France, describes
resistance and alternatives as “the twin strands of the DNA of social change.
One without the other is useless.”26
The denizens of Blockadia live and know this. Which is why theirs is neither
a movement of negation (no to the miners/drillers/pipe layers/heavy haulers),
nor solely of protection (defending cherished but static ways of life).
Increasingly, it is also a constructive movement, actively building an alternative
economy based on very different principles and values.
They are also learning—in a kind of people’s inversion of the shock doctrine
—that one of the most opportune times to build that next economy may be in
the aftermath of disasters, particularly climate-related disasters. That’s because
recurring mega-tragedies like Superstorm Sandy and Typhoon Haiyan that kill
thousands and cause billions in damages serve dramatically to educate the public
about the terrible costs of our current system, driving an argument for radical
change that addresses the root, rather than only the symptoms, of the climate
crisis. In the outpourings of volunteerism and donations, as well as the rage at
any whiff of profiteering, these disasters also activate the latent and broadly
shared generosity that capitalism works so hard to deny. Not to mention the fact
that, as the disaster capitalists well know, these events result in a whole lot of
public money being put on the table—an increasingly rare event during times of
relentless economic austerity.
With the right kind of public pressure, that money can be marshaled not just
to rebuild cities and communities, but to transform them into models of
nonextractive living. This can go far beyond the usual calls for stronger seawalls:
activists can demand everything from free, democratically controlled public
transit, to more public housing along those transit lines, powered by
community-controlled renewable energy—with the jobs created by this
investment going to local workers and paying a living wage. And unlike the
disaster capitalists who use crises to end-run around democracy, a People’s
Recovery (as many from the Occupy movement called for post-Sandy) would
require new democratic processes, including neighborhood assemblies, to decide
how hard-hit communities should be rebuilt. The overriding principle must be
to address the twin crises of inequality and climate change at the same time.

One example of this kind of inverted shock doctrine took place in the rural
town of Greensburg, Kansas. In 2007, a super tornado ripped through the area,
turning about 95 percent of the town into rubble. As a result of an
extraordinary, community-led process that began just days after the disaster,
with neighbors holding meetings in tents amid the wreckage of their former
lives, Greensburg today stands as a model “green town,” often described as the
greenest in America. The hospital, city hall, and school have all been built to
the highest certification level issued by Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED). And the town has become a destination for
hundreds of policy makers, anxious to learn more about its low-energy lighting
and its cutting-edge green architecture and waste reduction, as well as the wind
turbines that earn municipal revenue by producing more power than local
residents need.27
Most striking of all, this “living laboratory” is taking place in the heart of an
overwhelmingly Republican-voting county, where a great many people are
entirely unconvinced that climate change is real. But those debates seem to
matter little to residents: the shared experience of tremendous loss, as well as
the outpouring of generosity that follow the disaster, have, in Greensburg,
rekindled the values of land stewardship and intergenerational responsibility
that have deep roots in rural life. “The number one topic at those tent meetings
was talking about who we are—what are our values?” recalls Greensburg mayor
Bob Dixson, a former postmaster who comes from a long line of farmers. He
added, “Sometimes we agreed to disagree, but we were still civil to each other.
And let’s not forget that our ancestors were stewards of the land. My ancestors
lived in the original green homes: sod houses. . . . We learned that the only true
green and sustainable things in life are how we treat each other.”28
Responding to disaster with this kind of soul-searching is profoundly different
from the top-down model of the shock doctrine—these are attempts not to
exploit crisis, but to harness it to actually solve the underlying problems at their
root, and in ways that expand democratic participation rather than the opposite.
After Hurricane Katrina, New Orleans became a laboratory for corporate
interests intent on capturing and radically shrinking the public sphere, attacking
public health and education and leaving the city far more vulnerable to the next
disaster. But there is no reason why future disasters cannot be laboratories for
those who believe in reviving and reinventing the commons, and in ways that
actively reduce the chances that we will all be battered by many more such
devastating blows in the future.

From Local to Global Debts
On my first visit to the Northern Cheyenne Reservation, the question of how to
finance the kind of healthy economy anti-coal activists were fighting for came
up often. At one point, Lynette Two Bulls, who runs an organization that
teaches Cheyenne youth about their history, told me that she had heard about
something exciting happening in Ecuador. She was talking about the call for the
international community to compensate the country for not extracting the oil
in the Yasuní rainforest, with the money raised going to social programs and a
clean energy transition. It sounded like just what was needed on the reservation
and she wanted to know: if Ecuador could be compensated for keeping its oil in
the ground, then why couldn’t the Northern Cheyenne be compensated for
being carbon keepers for their coal?
It was a very good question, and the parallels were striking. Yasuní National
Park is an extraordinary swath of Ecuadorian rainforest, home to several
Indigenous tribes and a surreal number of rare and exotic animals (it has nearly
as many species of trees in 2.5 acres as are native to all of North America). And
underneath that riot of life sits an estimated 850 million barrels of crude oil,
worth about $7 billion. Burning that oil—and logging the rainforest to get it—
would add another 547 million tons of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. Of
course the oil majors want in.29
So in 2006, the environmental group Acción Ecológica (the same group that
made an early alliance with the anti-oil movement in Nigeria) put forward a
counterproposal: the Ecuadorian government should agree not to sell the oil,
but it should be supported in this action by the international community, which
would benefit collectively from the preservation of biodiversity and from
keeping planet-warming gases out of our shared atmosphere. That would mean
partially compensating Ecuador for what it would have earned from oil revenues
had it opted to drill. As Esperanza Martínez, president of Acción Ecológica,
explained, the “proposal establishes a precedent, arguing that countries should
be rewarded for not exploiting their oil. . . . Funds gathered would be used for
the [renewable] energy transition and could be seen as payments for the
ecological debt from North to South, and they should be distributed
democratically at the local and global levels.” Besides, she writes, surely “the
most direct way to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide was to leave fossil fuels in
the ground.”30

The Yasuní plan was based on the premise that Ecuador, like all developing
countries, is owed a debt for the inherent injustice of climate change—the fact
that wealthy countries had used up most of the atmospheric capacity for safely
absorbing CO2 before developing countries had a chance to industrialize. And
since the entire world would reap the benefits of keeping that carbon in the
ground (since it would help stabilize the global climate), it is unfair to expect
Ecuador, as a poor country whose people had contributed little to the climate
crisis, to shoulder the economic burden for giving up those potential petro
dollars. Instead, that burden should be shared between Ecuador and the highly
industrialized countries most responsible for the buildup of atmospheric carbon.
This is not charity, in other words: if wealthy countries do not want poorer ones
to pull themselves out of poverty in the same dirty way that we did, the onus is
on Northern governments to help foot the bill.
This, of course, is the core of the argument for the existence of a “climate
debt”—the same argument that Bolivia’s climate negotiator, Angélica Navarro
Llanos, had laid out for me in Geneva in 2009, helping me to see how climate
change could be the catalyst to attack inequality at its core, the basis for a
“Marshall Plan for the Earth.”31 The math behind the argument is simple
enough. As discussed, climate change is the result of cumulative emissions: the
carbon dioxide we emit stays in the atmosphere for approximately one to two
centuries, with a portion remaining for a millennium or even more.32 And since
the climate is changing as a result of two-hundred-odd years of such
accumulated emissions, that means that the countries that have been powering
their economies with fossil fuels since the Industrial Revolution have done far
more to cause temperatures to rise than those that just got in on the
globalization game in the last couple of decades.33 Developed countries, which
represent less than 20 percent of the world’s population, have emitted almost 70
percent of all the greenhouse gas pollution that is now destabilizing the climate.
(The United States alone, which comprises less than 5 percent of the global
population, now contributes about 14 percent of all carbon emissions.)34
And while developing countries like China and India spew large (and rapidly
growing) amounts of carbon dioxide, they are not equally responsible for the
cost of the cleanup, the argument goes, because they have contributed only a
fraction of the two hundred years of cumulative pollution that has caused the
crisis. Moreover, not everyone needs carbon for the same sorts of things. For
instance, India still has roughly 300 million people living without electricity.
Does it have the same degree of responsibility to cut its emissions as, say,

Britain, which has been accumulating wealth and emitting industrial levels of
carbon dioxide ever since James Watt introduced his successful steam engine in
1776?35
Of course not. That is why 195 countries, including the United States,
ratified the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in
1992, which enshrines the principle of “common but differentiated
responsibilities.” That basically means that everyone is responsible for being part
of the climate solution but the countries that have emitted more over the past
century should be the first to cut and should also help finance poorer countries
to switch to clean development models.36
Few dispute that climate debt is an argument with justice and international
law on its side. And yet Ecuador’s attempt to put that principle into practice in
the forest has been fraught with difficulties and may well fail. Once again, being
right, and even having rights, is not enough on its own to move the rich and
powerful.
In 2007, the center-left government of Rafael Correa took up the Yasuní
proposal and championed it, albeit briefly, on the world stage. Inside Ecuador,
the Yasuní-ITT initiative, as the plan is known (named for the coveted
Ishpingo, Tambococha, and Tiputini oil fields inside the park), became a
populist rallying cry, a vision for real economic development that did not
require sacrificing some of the most cherished parts of the country. A 2011 poll
found that 83 percent of Ecuadorians supported leaving the Yasuní’s oil in the
ground, up from 41 percent in 2008, a measure of how quickly a transformative
vision can capture the public imagination. But contributions from developed
countries were slow to arrive (only $13 million of a $3.6 billion goal was raised),
and in 2013 Correa announced that he was going to allow drilling to begin.37
Local supporters of the plan, however, have not given up and Correa’s
backsliding has opened a new Blockadia front: protestors opposing drilling have
already faced arrests and rubber bullets and, in the absence of a political
solution, Indigenous groups are likely to resist extraction with their bodies.
Meanwhile, in April 2014, a coalition of NGOs and citizen groups collected
more than 750,000 signatures calling for the matter to be put to a national
referendum (at the time of publication, it seemed that Correa was determined to
block the vote and push ahead with drilling). As Kevin Koenig, Ecuador
program director at Amazon Watch, wrote in The New York Times, “Though the
government should be held to account,” this is not all Correa’s fault. “The
stillbirth of Yasuni-ITT is a shared failure.”38

This setback, moreover, is a microcosm of the broader failure of the
international climate negotiations, which have stalled again and again over the
central question of whether climate action will reflect the history of who
created the crisis. The end result: emissions keep soaring way past safe levels,
everyone loses, the poorest lose first and worst.
Giving up on real solutions, like the imaginative one first proposed to save
the Yasuní, is therefore not an option. As with Indigenous land rights, if
governments are unwilling to live up to their international (and domestic)
responsibilities, then movements of people have to step into that leadership
vacuum and find ways to change the power equation.
The right, as usual, understands this better than the left, which is why the
climate change denial crowd consistently claims that global warming is a
socialist conspiracy to redistribute wealth (the Competitive Enterprise
Institute’s Chris Horner likes to say rich countries are being “extorted” by the
poor).39 Climate debt is not extortion but climate change, when fully
confronted, does raise some awfully thorny questions about what we in the
wealthy world owe to the countries on the front lines of a crisis they had little
hand in creating. At the same time, as elites in countries like China and India
grow ever more profligate in their consumption and emissions, traditional
North-South categories begin to break down and equally tough questions are
raised about the responsibilities of the rich and the rights of the poor wherever
they happen to live in the world. Because without facing those questions, there
is no hope of getting emissions under control where it counts the most.
As we have seen, emissions in North America and Europe still need to come
down dramatically but, thanks largely to the offshoring of production enabled by
the free-trade era, they have pretty much stopped growing. It’s the fast-rising
economies of the Global South—with China, India, Brazil, and South Africa
leading the pack—that are mostly responsible for the surge in emissions in
recent years, which is why we are racing toward tipping points far more quickly
than anticipated.
The reason for this shift in the source of emissions has everything to do with
the spectacular success multinational corporations have had in globalizing the
high-consumption-based economic model pioneered in wealthy western
countries. The trouble is, the atmosphere can’t take it. As the atmospheric
physicist and mitigation expert Alice Bows-Larkin put it in an interview, “The
number of people that went through industrialization the first time around is
like a drop in the ocean compared to the number of people going through

industrialization this time.” And to quote President Obama in late 2013, if
China’s and India’s energy consumption imitates the U.S. model, “we’ll be four
feet under water.”40
The truth is—and this is a humbling thing for cultures accustomed to
assuming that our actions shape the destiny of the world to accept—the real
battle will not be lost or won by us. It will be won or lost by those movements in
the Global South that are fighting their own Blockadia-style struggles—
demanding their own clean energy revolutions, their own green jobs, their own
pools of carbon left in the ground. And they are up against powerful forces
within their own countries that insist that it is their “turn” to pollute their way
to prosperity and that nothing matters more than economic growth. Indeed,
citing the rank unfairness of expecting developing countries to bear the bulk of
the burden for humanity avoiding climate catastrophe has become an
enormously effective excuse for governments of the Global South to shirk their
own responsibilities.
For this reason, if we accept the scientific evidence that we need to act fast to
prevent catastrophic climate change, it makes sense to focus our action where it
can have the greatest impact. And that’s clearly in the Global South. To cite
just one example: about a third of all greenhouse gas emissions come from
buildings (heating, cooling, and lighting them). Building stock in the Asia
Pacific region is projected to grow by a dramatic 47 percent by 2021, while
remaining relatively stable in the developed world. This means that, while
making existing buildings more energy efficient is important wherever we live,
there is nothing more important than helping ensure that new structures in Asia
are built to the highest standards of efficiency. Otherwise, we are all—the
North, South, East, and West—in for catastrophic emissions growth.41

Tipping the Balance
There is, however, much that can be done in the industrialized north to help tip
the balance of forces toward a model of development that does not rely on
endless growth and dirty fuels. Fighting the pipelines and export terminals that
would send fossil fuels to Asia is one piece of the puzzle. So is battling new freetrade deals, reining in our own overconsumption, and sensibly relocalizing our
economies, since plenty of the carbon China is burning is going toward making
useless stuff for us.

But the most powerful lever for change in the Global South is the same as in
the Global North: the emergence of positive, practical, and concrete
alternatives to dirty development that do not ask people to choose between
higher living standards and toxic extraction. Because if dirty coal is the only
way to turn on the lights in India, then that is how those lights will be turned
on. And if public transit is a disaster in Delhi, then more and more people will
keep choosing to drive cars.
And there are alternatives—models of development that do not require
massive wealth stratification, tragic cultural losses, or ecological devastation. As
in the Yasuní case, movements in the Global South are fighting hard for these
alternative development models—policies that would bring power to huge
numbers of people through decentralized renewable energy and revolutionize
urban transportation so that public transit is far more desirable than private cars
(indeed, as discussed, there have been riots demanding free public transit in
Brazil).
One proposal receiving increasing attention is for a “global feed-in tariff,”
which would create an internationally administered fund to support clean
energy transitions throughout the developing world. The architects of this plan
—economist Tariq Banuri and climate expert Niclas Hällström—estimate that a
$100 billion annual investment for ten to fourteen years “could effectively help
1.5 billion people gain access to energy, while taking decisive steps toward a
renewable energy future in time to prevent all our societies from suffering from
climate catastrophe.”42
Sunita Narain, director general of one of the most influential environmental
organizations in India, the New Delhi–based Centre for Science and
Environment, stresses that the solution is not for the wealthy world to contract
its economies while allowing the developing world to pollute its way to
prosperity (even if this were possible). It is for developing countries to “develop
differently. We do not want to first pollute and then clean up. So we need
money, we need technology, to be able to do things differently.”43 And that
means the wealthy world must pay its climate debts.
And yet financing a just transition in fast-developing economies has not
been a priority of activists in the North. Indeed a great many Big Green groups
in the United States consider the idea of climate debt to be politically toxic,
since, unlike the standard “energy security” and green jobs arguments that
present climate action as a race that rich countries can win, it requires
emphasizing the importance of international cooperation and solidarity.

Sunita Narain hears these objections often. “I’m always being told—
especially by my friends in America—that . . . issues of historical responsibility
are something that we should not talk about. What my forefathers did is not my
responsibility.” But, she said in an interview, this overlooks the fact that those
past actions have a direct bearing on why some countries are rich and others are
poor. “Your wealth today has a relationship with the way society has drawn on
nature, and overdrawn on nature. That has to be paid back. That’s the historical
responsibility issues that we need to confront.”44
These debates are, of course, familiar from other reparations battles. In Latin
America, progressive economists have long argued that Western powers owe an
“ecological debt” for centuries of colonial land grabs and resource extraction,
while Africa and Caribbean governments have, at various points (most notably
the 2001 World Conference Against Racism in Durban, South Africa) called
for reparations to be paid for transatlantic slavery. After receding for more than
a decade after the Durban conference, these claims were back in the news in
2013 when fourteen Caribbean nations banded together to make a formal
reparations claim to Britain, France, the Netherlands, and other European
countries that participated in the slave trade. “Our constant search and struggle
for development resources is linked directly to the historical inability of our
nations to accumulate wealth from the efforts of our peoples during slavery and
colonialism,” said Baldwin Spencer, prime minister of Antigua and Barbuda, in
July 2013. The goal of reparations, he argued, was to break the chains of
dependency once and for all.45
The rich world, for the most part, pretty much ignores these calls, dismissing
it all as ancient history, much as the U.S. government manages to disregard calls
for slavery reparations from African Americans (though in the spring of 2014,
the calls grew distinctly louder, thanks to breakthrough reporting by The
Atlantic’s Ta-Nehisi Coates, which once again rekindled the debate).46 But the
case for climate debt is a little different. We can debate the legacy of
colonialism, and we can argue about how much slavery shapes modern
underdevelopment. But the science of climate change doesn’t leave much room
for that kind of disagreement. Carbon leaves an unmistakable trail, the evidence
etched in coral and ice cores. We can accurately measure how much carbon we
can collectively emit into the atmosphere and who has taken up what share of
that budget over the past two hundred years or so.
On the other hand, all of these various suppressed and neglected debts are
not separate from one another but are better understood as different chapters in

the same, continuous story. It was planet-warming coal that powered the textile
mills and sugar refineries in Manchester and London that needed to be fed with
ever more raw cotton and sugarcane from the colonies, most of it harvested by
slave labor. And Eric Williams, the late scholar and Trinidad’s first prime
minister, famously argued that profits from slavery directly subsidized the growth
of industrialization in England, a process that we now know led inextricably to
climate change. The details of Williams’s claims have long been vigorously
debated, but his work received additional vindication in 2013 when researchers
at University College London released a database collecting information on the
identities and finances of British slave-owners in the mid-nineteenth century.47
The research project delved into the fact that when the British Parliament
ruled to abolish slavery in its colonies in 1833, it pledged to compensate British
slave owners for the loss of their human property—a backward form of
reparations for the perpetrators of slavery, not its victims. This led to payouts
adding up to £20 million—a figure that, according to The Independent,
“represented a staggering 40 per cent of the Treasury’s annual spending budget
and, in today’s terms, calculated as wage values, equates to around £16.5bn.”
Much of that money went directly into the coal-powered infrastructure of the
now roaring Industrial Revolution—from factories to railways to steamships.
These, in turn, were the tools that took colonialism to a markedly more
rapacious stage, with the scars still felt to this day.48
Coal didn’t create structural inequality—the boats that enabled the
transatlantic slave trade and first colonial land grabs were powered by wind, and
the early factories powered by water wheels. But the relentless and predictable
power of coal certainly supercharged the process, allowing both human labor
and natural resources to be extracted at rates previously unimaginable, laying
down the bones of the modern global economy.
And now it turns out that the theft did not end when slavery was abolished,
or when the colonial project faltered. In fact, it is still in progress, because the
emissions from those early steamships and roaring factories were the beginning
of the buildup of excess atmospheric carbon. So another way of thinking about
this history is that, starting two centuries ago, coal helped Western nations to
deliberately appropriate other people’s lives and lands; and as the emissions from
that coal (and later oil and gas) continually built up in the atmosphere, it gave
these same nations the means to inadvertently appropriate their descendants’
sky as well, gobbling up most of our shared atmosphere’s capacity to safely
absorb carbon.

As a direct result of these centuries of serial thefts—of land, labor, and
atmospheric space—developing countries today are squeezed between the
impacts of global warming, made worse by persistent poverty, and by their need
to alleviate that poverty, which, in the current economic system, can be done
most cheaply and easily by burning a great deal more carbon, dramatically
worsening the climate crisis. They cannot break this deadlock without help, and
that help can only come from those countries and corporations that grew
wealthy, in large part, as a result of those illegitimate appropriations.
The difference between this reparations claim and older ones is not that the
case is stronger. It’s that it does not rest on ethics and morality alone: wealthy
countries do not just need to help the Global South move to a low-emissions
economic path because it’s the right thing to do. We need to do it because our
collective survival depends on it.
At the same time, we need common agreement that having been wronged
does not grant a country the right to repeat the same crime on an even grander
scale. Just as having been raped does not bestow the right to rape, or having
been robbed the right to steal, having been denied the opportunity to choke the
atmosphere with pollution in the past does not grant anyone the right to choke
it today. Especially because today’s polluters know full well the catastrophic
implications of that pollution in ways that early industrialists did not.
So a middle ground must be found. Fortunately, a group of researchers with
the think tank EcoEquity and the Stockholm Environment Institute have
attempted to do just that: they have developed a detailed and innovative model
of what a rigorously fair approach to emission reductions might look like on a
global scale. Called the “Greenhouse Development Rights” framework, it is an
attempt to better reflect the new realities of wealth and carbon pollution
moving to the developing world, while firmly protecting the right to sustainable
development and recognizing the West’s greater responsibility for cumulative
emissions. Such an approach, they believe, is precisely what’s needed to break
the climate deadlock, since it addresses “the vast disparities found not only
between but also within countries.” Northern countries could be assured that the
wealthy of the Global South will do their part now and in the future, while
access to what is left of the atmospheric commons would be properly
safeguarded for the poor.49
With this in mind, each country’s fair share of the global carbon-cutting
burden is determined by two key factors: responsibility for historical emissions
and capacity to contribute, based on the country’s level of development. In an

illustrative scenario, the United States’s share of global emissions cuts needed by
the end of the decade might be something like 30 percent (the largest of any
single country). But not all of those reductions would need to be done at home
—some could be met by financing and otherwise supporting the transition to
low-carbon pathways in the South. And according to the researchers, with every
nation’s share of the global burden clearly defined and quantified, there would
be no need to rely on ineffective and easily gamed market mechanisms like
carbon trading.50
At a time when rich countries are crying poor and slashing social services for
their own people, asking governments to make those kinds of international
commitments can sound impossible. We barely do the old kind of aid anymore,
let alone some ambitious new justice-based approach. But there are, in the
immediate term, plenty of affordable ways for Northern countries to begin to
honor our climate debts without going broke—from erasing the foreign debts
currently owed by developing countries in exchange for climate action to
loosening green energy patents and transferring the associated technological
know-how.
Moreover, much of the cost does not need to come from regular taxpayers; it
can and should come from the corporations most responsible for driving this
crisis. That can take the form of any combination of the polluter-pays measures
already discussed, from a financial transaction tax, to eliminating subsidies for
fossil fuel companies.
What we cannot expect is that the people least responsible for this crisis will
foot all, or even most, of the bill. Because that is a recipe for catastrophic
amounts of carbon ending up in our common atmosphere. Like the call to honor
our treaties and other land-sharing agreements with Indigenous peoples, climate
change is once again forcing us to look at how injustices that many assumed
were safely buried in the past are shaping our shared vulnerability to global
climate collapse.
With many of the biggest pools of untapped carbon on lands controlled by
some of the poorest people on the planet, and with emissions rising most rapidly
in what were, until recently, some of the poorest parts of the world, there is
simply no credible way forward that does not involve redressing the real roots of
poverty.

I. Renewables are, in fact, much more reliable than power based on extraction, since those energy models
require continuous new inputs to avoid a crash, whereas once the initial investment has been made in

renewable energy infrastructure, nature provides the raw materials for free.

13

THE RIGHT TO REGENERATE
Moving from Extraction to Renewal
“Stop calling me resilient. I’m not resilient. Because every time you say, ‘Oh, they’re
resilient,’ you can do something else to me.”
—Tracie Washington, New Orleans–based civil rights attorney, 20101

“That woman is the first environment is an original instruction. In pregnancy our bodies
sustain life. . . . At the breast of women, the generations are nourished. From the bodies of
women flows the relationship of those generations both to society and to the natural world.
In this way is the earth our mother, the old people tell us. In this way, we as women are
earth.”
—Katsi Cook, Mohawk midwife, 20072

At the beginning of this book, I wrote about how becoming a mother in an age
of extinction brought the climate crisis into my heart in a new way. I had felt
the crisis before, of course, as all of us do on some level. But for the most part,
my climate fears expressed themselves as low-level melancholy, punctuated by
moments of panic, rather than full-blown grief.
At some point about seven years ago, I realized that I had become so
convinced that we were headed toward a grim ecological collapse that I was
losing my capacity to enjoy my time in nature. The more beautiful and striking
the experience, the more I found myself grieving its inevitable loss—like
someone unable to fall fully in love because she can’t stop imagining the
inevitable heartbreak.
Looking out at an ocean bay on British Columbia’s Sunshine Coast, a place
teeming with life, I would suddenly picture it barren—the eagles, herons, seals,

and otters, all gone. It got markedly worse after I covered the BP spill in the
Gulf of Mexico: for two years after, I couldn’t look at any body of water without
imagining it covered in oil. Sunsets were particularly difficult; the pink glow on
the waves looked too much like petroleum sheen. And once, while grilling a
beautiful piece of fresh sockeye salmon, I caught myself imagining how, as a
wizened old woman, I would describe this extraordinary fish—its electric color,
its jeweled texture—to a child living in a world where these wild creatures had
disappeared.
I called my morbid habit “pre-loss,” a variation on the “pre-crimes”
committed in the movie Minority Report. And I know I’m not the only one
afflicted. A few years ago, The Nation magazine, where I am a columnist, hosted
a one-week cruise to Alaska. The full-page ad that ran in the magazine carried
the tag line: “Come see the glaciers before they melt.” I called my editor in a
fury: How could we joke about melting glaciers while promoting a carbonspewing holiday? Are we saying that global warming is funny? That we have no
role to play in trying to stop it? The ad was pulled, but I realized then that, poor
taste aside, this is how a great many of us are consuming wilderness these days—
as a kind of nihilistic, final farewell. Gobble it all up before it’s gone.
This ecological despair was a big part of why I resisted having kids until my
late thirties. For years I joked about giving birth to a Mad Maxian climate
warrior, battling alongside her friends for food and fuel. And I was also fully
aware that if we were to avoid that future, we would all have to cut down on the
number of super-consumers we were producing. It was around the time that I
began work on this book that my attitude started to shift. Some of it, no doubt,
was standard-issue denial (what does one more kid matter . . . ). But part of it
was also that immersing myself in the international climate justice movement
had helped me imagine various futures that were decidedly less bleak than the
post-apocalyptic cli-fi pastiche that had become my unconscious default. Maybe,
just maybe, there was a future where replacing our own presence on earth could
once again be part of a cycle of creation, not destruction.
And I was lucky: pregnant the first month we started trying. But then, just as
fast, my luck ran out. A miscarriage. An ovarian tumor. A cancer scare. Surgery.
Month after month of disappointing single pink lines on home pregnancy tests.
Another miscarriage.
Then I stepped into the vortex I came to call the fertility factory (“do you
have to call it that?” my patient husband pleaded). In its labyrinth of rooms in a
downtown office building, drugs, hormones, and day surgeries were dispensed as

liberally as toothbrushes at a dentist’s office. The working assumption was that
any woman who steps through the door will do whatever it takes to land a
newborn in her arms, even if that means having three (or five) newborns
instead of one. And even if that means seriously compromising her own health
with risky drugs and poorly regulated medical procedures in the process.
I did try to be a good patient for a while, but it didn’t work. The last straw
was a doctor telling me, after my first (and only) round of in vitro fertilization
(IVF) that I probably had “egg quality issues” and I should consider an egg
donor. Feeling like a supermarket chicken past its best-before date, and with
more than a few questions about how much these doctors were driven by a
desire to improve their own “live birth” success rates, I stopped going. I tossed
the pills, safely disposed of the syringes, and moved on.
Informing friends and family that I had given up on a technological fix to my
apparent inability to conceive was surprisingly difficult. People often felt the
need to tell me stories about friends and acquaintances who had become parents
despite incredible odds. Usually these stories involved people who got pregnant
using one of the technologies that I had decided not to try (with the guiltinducing implication that, by drawing the line where I did, I was clearly not
committed enough to procreation). Quite a few were about women who had
used every technology available—nine rounds of IVF, egg donors, surrogacy—
and then gotten pregnant as soon as they stopped. Common to all these stories
was the unquestioned assumption that the body’s No never really means no,
that there is always a workaround. And, moreover, that there is something
wrong with choosing not to push up against biological barriers if the technology
is available.
On some level this faith is perfectly understandable. The female reproductive
system is amazingly resilient—two ovaries and fallopian tubes when one would
do; hundreds of thousands of eggs when all that is really needed are a few dozen
good ones; and a generous window of opportunity to conceive spanning ages
twelve to fifty (more or less). Yet what I felt my body telling me was that, even
with all this ingenious built-in resilience, there is still a wall that can be hit, a
place beyond which we cannot push. I felt that wall as a real structure inside my
body and slamming against it had left me bruised. I didn’t want to keep bashing
away.
My resistance to further intervention did not come from some fixed idea
about how babies should be conceived “naturally” or not at all. I know that for
men and women with clear infertility diagnoses, these technologies are a joyous

miracle, and that for gay, lesbian, and trans couples, some form of assisted
reproduction is the only route to biological parenthood. And I believe that
everyone who wants to become a parent should have the option, regardless of
their marital status, sexual orientation, or income (in my view, these procedures
should be covered by public health insurance, rather than restricted to those
who can afford the astronomical fees).
What made me uneasy at the clinic were, oddly, many of the same things
that made me wary of the geoengineers: a failure to address fundamental
questions about underlying causes, as well as the fact that we seem to be turning
to high-risk technologies not just when no other options are available, but at
the first sign of trouble—even as a convenient shortcut (“tick tock,” women of a
certain age are told). Where I live, for instance, the system makes it
significantly less complex to find an egg donor or a surrogate than to adopt a
baby.
And then there is the matter of unacknowledged risks. Despite the casual
attitude of many practitioners in this more than $10 billion global industry, the
risks are real. A Dutch study, for instance, showed that women who had
undergone in vitro fertilization were twice as likely to develop “ovarian
malignancies”; an Israeli one found that women who had taken the widely
prescribed fertility drug clomiphene citrate (which I was on) were at
“significantly higher” risk for breast cancer; and Swedish researchers showed
that IVF patients in the early stages of pregnancy were seven times more likely
to develop a life-threatening blood clot in the lung. Other studies showed
various kinds of risks to the children born of these methods.3
I did not know about this research when I was going to the clinic; my
concerns stemmed from a generalized fear that by taking drugs that dramatically
increased the number of eggs available for fertilization each month, I was
overriding one of my body’s safety mechanisms, forcing something that was
better not forced. But there was little space for expressing these doubts at the
clinic: conversations with the doctors were as brief as speed dates and questions
seemed to be regarded as signs of weakness. Just look at all those joyous birth
announcements from grateful couples papering every available surface in the
examination rooms and hallways—what could be more important than that?
So why share these experiences and observations in a book about climate
change? Partly in the spirit of transparency. The five years it took to research
and write this book were the same years that my personal life was occupied with
failed pharmaceutical and technological interventions, and ultimately,

pregnancy and new motherhood. I tried, at first, to keep these parallel journeys
segregated, but it didn’t always work. Inevitably, one would escape its respective
box to interrupt the other. What I was learning about the ecological crisis
informed the responses to my own fertility crisis; and what I learned about
fertility began to leave its mark on how I saw the ecological crisis.
Some of the ways in which these two streams in my life intersected were
simply painful. For instance, if I was going through a particularly difficult
infertility episode, just showing up to a gathering of environmentalists could be
an emotional minefield. The worst part were the ceaseless invocations of our
responsibilities to “our children” and “our grandchildren.” I knew these
expressions of intergenerational duty were heartfelt and in no way meant to be
exclusionary—and yet I couldn’t help feeling shut out. If caring about the future
was primarily a function of love for one’s descendants, where did that leave
those of us who did not, or could not, have children? Was it even possible to be
a real environmentalist if you didn’t have kids?
And then there was the whole Earth Mother/Mother Earth thing: the idea
that women, by right of our biological ability to carry children, enjoy a special
connection to that fertile and bountiful matriarch that is the earth herself. I
have no doubt that some women experience that bond with nature as a powerful
creative force. But it’s equally true that some of the most wildly creative and
nurturing women (and men) that I know are childless by choice. And where did
the equation of motherhood with the earth leave women like me, who wanted
to conceive but were not able to? Were we exiles from nature? In my bleaker
moments, I battled the conviction that the connection between my body and
the cycle of creation had been unnaturally severed, like a dead telephone line.
But along the way, that feeling changed. It’s not that I got in touch with my
inner Earth Mother; it’s that I started to notice that if the earth is indeed our
mother, then far from the bountiful goddess of mythology, she is a mother facing
a great many fertility challenges of her own. Indeed one of the most distressing
impacts of the way in which our industrial activities affect the natural world is
that they are interfering with systems at the heart of the earth’s fertility cycles,
from soil to precipitation. I also began to notice that a great many species
besides ours are bashing up against their own infertility walls, finding it harder
and harder to successfully reproduce and harder still to protect their young from
the harsh new stresses of a changing climate.
On a much more optimistic note, I started to learn that protecting and
valuing the earth’s ingenious systems of reproducing life and the fertility of all of

its inhabitants, may lie at the center of the shift in worldview that must take
place if we are to move beyond extractivism. A worldview based on
regeneration and renewal rather than domination and depletion.

An Aquatic Miscarriage
Since I had already quit the clinic, I had no idea that I was pregnant when I
went to Louisiana to cover the BP spill. A few days after I got home, though, I
could tell something was off and did a home pregnancy test. Two lines this time,
but the second one was strangely faint. “You can’t be just a little bit pregnant,”
the saying goes. And yet that is what I seemed to be. After going in for more
tests, my family doctor called to tell me (in the hope-dampening tone with
which I had become familiar) that while I was pregnant my hormone levels were
much too low and I would likely miscarry, for the third time.
Instantly my mind raced back to the Gulf. While covering the spill, I had
breathed in toxic fumes for days and, at one point, waded up to my waist in
contaminated water to get to a secluded beach covered in oil. I searched on the
chemicals BP was using in huge quantities, and found reams of online chatter
linking them to miscarriages. Whatever was happening, I had no doubt that it
was my doing.
After about a week of monitoring, the pregnancy was diagnosed as ectopic,
which means that the embryo had implanted itself outside the uterus, most
likely in a fallopian tube. I was rushed from the doctor’s office to the emergency
room. Ectopics are a leading cause of maternal death, particularly in the
developing world: if undiagnosed, the embryo keeps growing in its impossible
location, causing a rupture and massive internal hemorrhaging. If caught in
time, the somewhat creepy treatment is one or more injections of methotrexate,
a powerful drug used in chemotherapy to arrest cell development (and carrying
many of the same side effects). Once fetal development has stopped, the
pregnancy miscarries on its own, but it can take weeks.
It was a tough, drawn-out loss for my husband and me. But it was also a relief
to learn that the miscarriage had nothing to do with anything that had
happened in the Gulf. Knowing that did make me think a little differently about
my time covering the spill, however. As I waited for the pregnancy to “resolve,”
I thought in particular about a long day spent on the Flounder Pounder, a sport

fishing boat that a group of us had chartered as we went looking for evidence
that the oil had entered the marshlands.
Our guide was Jonathan Henderson, an organizer with the Gulf Restoration
Network, a heroic local organization devoted to repairing the damage done to
the wetlands by the oil and gas industry. As we navigated through the narrow
bayous of the Mississippi River Delta, Henderson kept leaning far over the side
of the boat to get a better look at the bright green grass. What concerned him
most was not what we were all seeing—fish jumping in fouled water, Roseau
cane coated in reddish brown oil—but something much harder to detect, at
least without a microscope and sample jars. Spring is the beginning of spawning
season on the Gulf Coast and Henderson knew that these marshes were teeming
with nearly invisible zooplankton and tiny juveniles that would develop into
adult shrimp, oysters, crabs, and fin fish. In these fragile weeks and months, the
marsh grass acts as an aquatic incubator, providing nutrients and protection
from predators. “Everything is born in these wetlands,” he said.4 Unless, of
course, something interferes with the process.
When fish are in their egg and larval phases, they have none of the defensive
tools available to more mature animals. These tiny creatures travel where the
tides carry them, unable to avoid whatever poison crosses their path. And at this
early stage of development, exquisitely fragile membranes offer no protection
from toxins; even negligible doses can cause death or mutation.
As far as Henderson was concerned, the prospects for these microscopic
creatures did not look good. Each wave brought in more oil and dispersants,
sending levels of carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs)
soaring. And this was all happening at the absolute worst possible moment on
the biological calendar: not only shellfish, but also bluefin tuna, grouper,
snapper, mackerel, swordfish, and marlin were all spawning during these same
key months. Out in the open water, floating clouds of translucent proto-life
were just waiting for one of the countless slicks of oil and dispersants to pass
through them like an angel of death. As John Lamkin, a fisheries biologist for
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, put it: “Any larvae
that came into contact with the oil doesn’t have a chance.”5
Unlike the oil-coated pelicans and sea turtles, which were being featured on
the covers of the world’s newspapers that week, these deaths would attract no
media attention, just as they would go uncounted in the official assessments of
the spill’s damage. Indeed, if a certain species of larva was in the process of being
snuffed out, we would likely not find out about it for years—until those

embryonic life-forms would have normally reached maturity. And then, rather
than some camera-ready mass die-off, there would just be . . . nothing. An
absence. A hole in the life cycle.
That’s what happened to the herring after the Exxon Valdez disaster. For
three years after the spill, herring stocks were robust. But in the fourth,
populations suddenly plummeted by roughly three quarters. The next year, there
were so few, and they were so sick, that the herring fishery in Prince William
Sound was closed. The math made sense: the herring that were in their egg and
larval stages at the peak of the disaster would have been reaching maturity right
about then.6
This was the kind of delayed disaster that Henderson was worried about as he
peered into the marsh grass. When we reached Redfish Bay, usually a sportfishing paradise, we cut the engine on the Flounder Pounder and drifted for a
while in silence, taking video of the oily sheen that covered the water’s surface.
As our boat rocked in that terrible place—the sky buzzing with Black Hawk
helicopters and snowy white egrets—I had the distinct feeling that we were
suspended not in water but in amniotic fluid, immersed in a massive multispecies miscarriage. When I learned that I too was in the early stages of creating
an ill-fated embryo, I started to think of that time in the marsh as my
miscarriage inside a miscarriage.
It was then that I let go of the idea that infertility made me some sort of exile
from nature, and began to feel what I can only describe as a kinship of the
infertile. It suddenly dawned on me that I was indeed part of a vast biotic
community, and it was a place where a great many of us—humans and
nonhuman alike—found ourselves engaged in an uphill battle to create new
living beings.

A Country for Old Men
For all the talk about the right to life and the rights of the unborn, our culture
pays precious little attention to the particular vulnerabilities of children, let
alone developing life. When drugs and chemicals are approved for safe use and
exposure, risk assessments most often focus on the effects on adults. As biologist
Sandra Steingraber has observed, “Entire regulatory systems are premised on the
assumption that all members of the population basically act, biologically, like
middle-aged men. . . . Until 1990, for example, the reference dose for radiation

exposure was based on a hypothetical 5'7” tall white man who weighed 157
pounds.” More than three quarters of the mass-produced chemicals in the
United States have never been tested for their impacts on fetuses or children.
That means they are being released in the environment with no consideration
for how they will impact those who weigh, say, twenty pounds, like your average
one-year-old girl, let alone a half-pound, like a nineteen-week fetus.7
And yet when clusters of infertility and infant illness arise, they very often
are the first warning signs of a broader health crisis. For instance, for years it
seemed that while there were certainly water and air safety issues associated
with fracking, there was no clear evidence that the practice was seriously
impacting human health. But in April 2014, researchers with the Colorado
School of Public Health and Brown University published a peer-reviewed study
looking at birth outcomes in rural Colorado, where a lot of fracking is under
way. It found that mothers living in the areas with the most natural gas
development were 30 percent more likely to have babies with congenital heart
defects than those who lived in areas with no gas wells near their homes. They
also found some evidence that high levels of maternal exposure to gas extraction
increased the risks of neurological defects.8
At around the same time, academics at Princeton, Columbia, and MIT gave
a talk at the annual meeting of the American Economic Association, where
they presented preliminary findings of a still unpublished study based on
Pennsylvania birth records from 2004 to 2011. As Mark Whitehouse of
Bloomberg View reported (he was one of the few journalists who saw their talk),
“They found that proximity to fracking increased the likelihood of low birth
weight by more than half, from about 5.6 percent to more than 9 percent. The
chances of a low Apgar score, a summary measure of the health of newborn
children, roughly doubled.”9
These kinds of infant health impacts—and much worse—are all too familiar
in communities that live in closest proximity to the dirtiest parts of our fossil
fuel economy. For instance, the Aamjiwnaang First Nation, which is located
just south of the industrial city of Sarnia in southern Ontario, has been the
subject of intense scientific scrutiny because of its “lost boys.” Up until 1993,
the number of boys and girls born to the small Indigenous community was pretty
much in keeping with the national average, with slightly more boys than girls.
But as people continued living near the petrochemical plants, which had earned
the region the nickname “Chemical Valley,” that changed. By 2003, the day
care was filled with girls and just a handful of boys, and there were years when

the community could barely scrape together enough boys to form a baseball or
hockey team. Sure enough, a study of birth records confirmed that by the end of
the period between 1993 and 2003, twice as many girls as boys had been born
on the reserve. Between 1999 and 2003, just 35 percent of Aamjiwnaang’s
births were boys—“one of the steepest declines ever reported in the ratio of boys
to girls,” as Men’s Health magazine revealed in a 2009 exposé. Studies also found
that 39 percent of Aamjiwnaang’s women had had miscarriages, compared with
roughly 20 percent in the general female population. Research published in
2013 showed that hormone-disrupting chemicals may be to blame, since women
and children in the area had higher-than-average levels of PCBs in their
bodies.10
I heard similar fertility horror stories in Mossville, Lousiana, a historic
African-American town near Lake Charles. More than half of its two thousand
families have left in recent years, fleeing the relentless pollution from their
uninvited next-door neighbors: a network of massive industrial plants that
convert the oil and gas pumped out of the Gulf into petroleum, plastics, and
chemicals. Mossville is a textbook case of environmental racism: founded by
freed slaves, it was once a safe haven for its residents, who enjoyed comfortable
lives thanks in part to the rich hunting and fishing grounds in the surrounding
wetlands. But beginning in the 1930s and 1940s, state politicians aggressively
courted petrochemical and other industries with lavish tax breaks, and one giant
plant after another set up shop on Mossville’s doorstep, some just a few hundred
feet from the clapboard homes. Today, fourteen chemical plants and refineries
surround the town, including the largest concentration of vinyl production
facilities in the U.S. Many of the hulking structures appear to be made entirely
of metal pipes; spires in menacing chemical cathedrals. Roaring machinery
spews emissions twenty-four hours a day, while floodlights and flares ignite the
night sky.11
Accidental leaks are commonplace and explosions are frequent. But even
when factories are running smoothly, they spew approximately four million
pounds of toxic chemicals into the surrounding soil, air, and groundwater each
year.12 Before arriving in Mossville, I had heard about cancer and respiratory
illnesses, and I knew that some residents have dioxin levels three times the
national average. What I was unprepared for were the stories of miscarriages,
hysterectomies, and birth defects.
Debra Ramirez, who after years of struggle was finally forced to abandon her
home and move to Lake Charles, described Mossville to me as “a woman’s

womb of chemicals. And we’re dying in that womb.” Having just left BP’s
aquatic miscarriage, I found the idea of a toxic womb particularly chilling. It
became more so after Ramirez shared part of her own family’s health history.
She had undergone a hysterectomy three decades earlier. So had all three of her
sisters and her daughter. “It was just repeating from generation to generation,”
she said. Five hysterectomies in one family might have been bad genetic luck.
But then Ramirez showed me footage from a town hall special that CNN’s Dr.
Sanjay Gupta had hosted on this “toxic town.” On camera, Ramirez told the
visiting correspondent that she had had a total hysterectomy, “like most young
women do in this area.” Taken aback, Gupta asked the rest of the women in the
room whether they had had hysterectomies—multiple women answered yes,
nodding silently. And yet despite the many studies that have sought to
document the impact of toxins on human health in Mossville, not one has
looked closely at their impact on fertility.13
Perhaps this should come as no surprise. As a culture, we do a very poor job
of protecting, valuing, or even noticing fertility—not just among humans but
across life’s spectrum. Indeed vast amounts of money and cutting-edge
technology are devoted to practices that actively interfere with the life cycle.
We have a global agricultural model that has succeeded in making it illegal for
farmers to engage in the age-old practice of saving seeds, the building blocks of
life, so that new seeds have to be repurchased each year. And we have a global
energy model that values fossil fuels over water, where all life begins and
without which no life can survive.
Our economic system, meanwhile, does not value women’s reproductive
labor, pays caregivers miserably, teachers almost as badly, and we generally hear
about female reproduction only when men are trying to regulate it.

BP’s Legacy and a “Handful of Nothing”
If we tend to neglect the impact our industrial activities are having on human
reproduction, the more vulnerable nonhumans fare significantly worse. A case
in point is the risk assessment report that BP produced ahead of the Gulf Coast
disaster. Before securing approval to drill in such deep water, the company had
to produce a credible plan assessing what would happen to the ecosystem in the
event of a spill, and what the company would do to respond. With the risk
minimization that is one of the industry’s hallmarks, the company confidently

predicted that many adult fish and shellfish would be able to survive a spill
whether by swimming away or by “metaboliz[ing] hydrocarbons,” while marine
mammals like dolphins might experience some “stress.”14 Conspicuously absent
from the report are the words “eggs,” “larvae,” “fetus,” and “juvenile.” In other
words, the working assumption, once again, was that we live in a world where
all creatures are already fully grown.
That, unsurprisingly, proved to be a tragic assumption. Just as was feared in
the early days of the spill, one of the most lasting legacies of the BP disaster may
well be an aquatic infertility crisis, one that in some parts of the Gulf could
reverberate for decades if not longer. Two years after the spill, Donny Waters, a
large-scale fisherman in Pensacola, Florida, who primarily catches red snapper
and grouper, reported, “We don’t see any significant numbers of small fish”—a
reference to the young fish that would have been in their larval stage at the
peak of the disaster. That had not yet impacted the commercial catch since
small fish are released anyway. But Waters, who holds one of the largest
individual fishing quotas in the Pensacola area, worried that when 2016 or 2017
rolls around—when those small fish would normally be reaching maturity—he
and his colleagues will be hauling in their lines only to “come up with a handful
of nothing.”15
One year after the spill, shrimpers, crabbers, and oystermen working in some
of the most affected parts of Louisiana and Mississippi also began to report
sharply reduced catches—and in some areas, that female crabs were relatively
scarce, and that many of those caught during spawning season didn’t have any
eggs. (Some shellfish catches in these areas have shown improvement, but
reports of missing or egg-less female crabs have persisted; similar signs of
reproductive impairment have been observed in the shrimp and oyster
fisheries.)16
The precise contribution of the spill to these fertility problems remains
unclear as much of the research is still incomplete—but a growing body of
scientific data adds weight to anecdotal reports from of fishing crews. In one
study, for instance, researchers sampled oysters after the spill and found
alarmingly elevated concentrations of three heavy metals contained in
petroleum—with 89 percent of the oysters also displaying a form of metaplasia,
or stress-related tissue abnormality that is known to interfere with reproduction.
Another study, this one by researchers at the Georgia Institute of Technology,
tested the impact of BP oil mixed with Corexit on rotifers—microscopic animals
at the bottom of the food web—which “provide food for baby fish, shrimp and

crabs in estuaries.” It found that even tiny amounts of the mixture “inhibited
rotifer egg hatching by 50 percent.”17
Perhaps most worrying are the findings of Andrew Whitehead, a biology
professor at the University of California, Davis, who has conducted a series of
studies with colleagues on the impact of BP’s oil on one of the most abundant
fish in the Gulf marshes, the minnow-sized killifish. He found that when
killifish embryos were exposed to sediments contaminated with BP oil
(including sediment samples collected over a year after the spill), “these
embryos are getting whacked. . . . They’re not growing, developing properly,
they’re not hatching out properly. They’ve got cardiovascular system
developmental problems, their hearts aren’t forming properly.”18
Missing fish don’t tend to make the news; for one thing, there are no
pictures, just a “handful of nothing,” as Waters feared. But that is decidedly not
the case when baby dolphins start dying en masse, which is what happened in
early 2011. In the month of February alone, NOAA’s National Marine Fisheries
Service reported that thirty-five dead baby dolphins had been collected on Gulf
Coast beaches and in marshes—an eighteen-fold increase from the usual
number (only two dead baby dolphins are found in a typical February). By the
end of April 2014, 235 baby bottlenose dolphins had been discovered along the
Gulf Coast, a staggering figure since scientists estimate that the number of
cetacean corpses found on or near shore represents only 2 percent of the “true
death toll”; the rest are never found.19
After examining the dolphins, NOAA scientists discovered that some of the
calves had been stillborn, while others died days after birth. “Something has
happened that these animals are now either aborting or the animals are not fit
enough to survive,” said Moby Solangi, the executive director of the Institute
for Marine Mammal Studies (IMMS) in Gulfport, Mississippi, and one of the
scientists investigating the incidents.I20
The deaths took place during the first birthing season for bottlenose dolphins
since the BP disaster. That means that for much of their twelve-month gestation
period, these calves were developing inside mothers who very likely swam in
waters polluted with oil and chemical dispersant and who may well have
inhaled toxic fumes when they surfaced to breathe. Metabolizing hydrocarbons
is hard work and could have made the dolphins significantly more vulnerable to
bacteria and diseases. Which might explain why, when NOAA-led scientists
examined twenty-nine dolphins off the Louisiana coast, they found high levels
of lung disease, as well as strikingly low levels of cortisol, an indication of

adrenal insufficiency and a severely compromised ability to respond to stress.
They also found one dolphin that was pregnant with a five-month-old
“nonviable” fetus—an extremely rare occurrence in dolphins, indeed one
undocumented in the scientific literature up until this incident. “I’ve never seen
such a high prevalence of very sick animals—and with unusual conditions such
as the adrenal hormone abnormalities,” said Lori Schwacke, lead author of a
paper on these findings that was published in late 2013. Commenting on the
study, NOAA warned that the dolphins would “likely” face “reduced survival
and ability to reproduce.”21
The spill wasn’t the only added stress these animals faced in this fateful
period. The winter of 2010–2011 saw an abnormally heavy snowfall in the
region, a phenomenon scientists have linked to climate change. When the huge
snowpack melted, it sent torrents of freshwater into the Gulf of Mexico, where
it not only dangerously lowered salinity and temperature levels for mammals
accustomed to warm saltwater, but likely combined with the oil and dispersant
to create an even more dangerous mess for dolphins and other cetaceans. As
Ruth Carmichael, senior marine scientist at the Dauphin Island Sea Lab,
explains, “These freight trains of cold fresh water may have assaulted [the
dolphins], essentially kicking them when they were already down.”22
This is the one-two punch of an economy built on fossil fuels: lethal when
extraction goes wrong and the interred carbon escapes at the source; lethal
when extraction goes right and the carbon is successfully released into the
atmosphere. And catastrophic when these two forces combine in one ecosystem,
as they did that winter on the Gulf Coast.

Disappearing Babies in a Warming World
In species after species, climate change is creating pressures that are depriving
life-forms of their most essential survival tool: the ability to create new life and
carry on their genetic lines. Instead, the spark of life is being extinguished,
snuffed out in its earliest, most fragile days: in the egg, in the embryo, in the
nest, in the den.
For sea turtles—an ancient species that managed to survive the asteroid
collision that killed the dinosaurs—the problem is that the sand in which
females bury their eggs is becoming too hot. In some cases, eggs are reaching
lethal temperatures and many eggs aren’t hatching at all, or else they are

hatching but mostly as females. At least one species of coral is poised for a
similar climate-related reproductive crisis: when water temperature reaches
above 34 degrees Celsius (93 Fahrenheit), egg fertilization stops. Meanwhile,
high temperatures can make reef-building coral so hungry that they reabsorb
their own eggs and sperm.23
For oysters along the Pacific Coast of Oregon and Washington State, the
problem in recent years is that the water is acidifying with such alarming
rapidity that larvae are unable to form their tiny shells in the earliest days of life,
leading to mass die-offs. Richard Feely, an oceanographer with the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, explains that before the die-offs
began, “What we knew at the time was that many organisms as adults are
sensitive to acidification. What we did not know is that the larval stages of
those organisms are much more sensitive.” By 2014, the same problem was
leading to a collapse of scallops off British Columbia. One of the largest scallop
farming operations on the coast reported that some ten million mollusks had
died in its operation alone.24
On land, climate change is also hitting the very young first and worst. In
West Greenland, for instance, there has been a dramatic decrease in birth and
survival rates of caribou calves. It seems that rising temperatures have changed
the growing patterns of plants that are the source of critical energy for caribou
calves, as well as for their mothers during reproduction and lactation.
Populations of songbirds like the pied flycatcher, meanwhile, are collapsing in
some parts of Europe because the caterpillars that parents depend upon to feed
their young are hatching too early. In Maine, Arctic tern chicks are starving to
death for similar reasons: they rely on small fish that have fled for colder waters.
Meanwhile, there are reports that around Canada’s Hudson Bay, birth dens of
polar bears are collapsing in the thawing permafrost, which leaves tiny cubs
dangerously exposed.25
As I delved into the impacts of climate change on reproduction and youth, I
came across many more such examples of bottom-up threats, endangering the
youngest members of species ranging from wolverine cubs (whose parents are
having trouble storing food in ice) to peregrine falcon chicks (which are
catching hypothermia and drowning in unusual downpours) to Arctic ring seal
pups (whose snowy birthing dens, like those of polar bears, are threatened).26
Once this pattern is recognized, it seems obvious: of course the very young are
much more vulnerable than adults; of course even the most subtle
environmental changes will hurt them more; and of course fertility is one of the

first functions to erode when animals are under stress. And yet what struck me
most in this research was the frequency with which all this came as a surprise,
even to the experts in the field.
In a way, these various oversights make sense. We are used to thinking about
extinction as a process that affects a species or cluster of species of every age
group—the asteroid that wipes out the dinosaurs, or the way that our ancestors
hunted a range of animals until they were all gone. And we still extinguish
species that way, of course. But in the age of fossil fuels, we can render the earth
less alive by far more stealthy means: by interfering with the capacity of adults
to reproduce in the first place, and by making the first days of life simply too
difficult to survive. No corpses, just an absence—more handfuls of nothing.

Fallow Time
A few months after I stopped going to the fertility clinic, a friend recommended
that I see a naturopathic doctor who had helped several people she knew to get
pregnant. This practitioner had her own theories about why so many women
without an obvious medical reason were having trouble conceiving, and they
were radically different from the ones I had come across so far.
Carrying a baby is one of the hardest physical tasks we can ask of ourselves,
she pointed out, and if our bodies decline the task, it is often a sign that they are
facing too many other demands—high-stress work that keeps us in a near
constant state of “fight or flight,” perhaps, or the physical stress of having to
metabolize toxins or allergens, or just the stresses of modern life (or some
combination of all of the above). With the body in overdrive fending off these
real and perceived threats, it can start sending signals that it does not have the
excess energy necessary to build and nourish a whole new life.
Most fertility clinics use drugs and technology to override this bodily
resistance, and they work for a lot of people. But if they do not (and they often
do not) women are frequently left even more stressed, with their hormones more
out of whack, than when they began the process. The naturopath proposed an
approach that was in every way the mirror opposite: try to figure out what might
be overtaxing my system and then remove those things, and hope that a
healthier, more balanced endocrine system will start sending some more
welcoming signals to babies-to-be.

After a series of tests, I was diagnosed with a whole mess of allergies I didn’t
know I had, as well as with adrenal insufficiency and low cortisol levels (the
same diagnosis, weirdly, that the NOAA scientists made for the Gulf Coast
dolphins). The doctor asked me a lot of questions about my lifestyle, including
how many hours I had spent in the air over the past year. “Why,” I asked warily,
knowing that the answer was going to be ugly. “Because of the radiation. There
have been some studies done with flight attendants that show it might not be
good for fertility.” Great. Turns out flying was not just poisoning the
atmosphere, it may have been poisoning me too.27
I admit that I was far from convinced that this new approach would result in
a pregnancy, or even that the science behind it was wholly sound. And I was
keenly aware that attributing infertility to female stress has an extensive and
inglorious history. “Just relax,” women who cannot conceive have long been
told (in other words: it’s all in your head/all your fault). Then again, the doctors
at the fertility factory had clearly been engaged in their own version of highly
lucrative guesswork, and after that experience, this doctor was a tonic.II28
Finally someone was trying to figure out why my infertility was happening,
instead of trying to force my body to do something it clearly was rejecting. As
for the downsides, they reminded me of a popular cartoon about global warming:
A man stands up at a climate summit and asks, “What if it’s a big hoax and we
create a better world for nothing?” If all this adrenal stuff turned out to be a big
hoax, the worst thing that could happen is that I’d end up healthier and less
stressed out.
So I did it all. The yoga, the meditation, the dietary changes (the usual wars
on wheat, gluten, dairy, and sugar—as well as various more esoteric odds and
ends). I went to acupuncture and drank bitter Chinese herbs, and my kitchen
counter became a gallery of powders and supplements. I also left my urban home
in Toronto and moved to rural British Columbia, a ferry ride from the nearest
city and a twenty-minute drive to the nearest hardware store. This is the part of
the world where my parents live, where my grandparents are buried, and where I
have always gone to write and rest. I would see what it was like to live there fulltime.
Gradually, I learned to identify a half dozen birds by sound, and the sea
mammals by the ripples that appeared on the water’s surface. I even caught
myself appreciating beautiful moments without simultaneously mourning their
loss. The golden card in my wallet attesting to my frequent flyer status expired
for the first time in a decade, and I was glad.

I still traveled for research, though—and when I did, I often noticed parallels
between my new doctor’s theories about infertility and some of the ideas I was
encountering about the changes humanity must make if we are to avoid
collapse. Her advice had pretty much boiled down to this: before you can take
care of another human being you have to take care of yourself. In a sense she
was saying that I had to give myself some fallow time, as opposed to the
mechanistic “push harder” approach that dominates Western medicine.
I thought of this advice when I left my hideout and traveled to the Land
Institute in Salina, Kansas, one of the most exciting living laboratories for
cutting-edge, agro-ecological farming methods. Wes Jackson, the founder and
president of the center, says that he is trying to solve what he calls “the 10,000year-old problem of agriculture.”29 That problem, in essence, is that ever since
humans started planting seeds and tilling fields, they have been stripping the
soil of its fertility.
Without human interference, plants grow in different varieties next to one
another and as perennials, reseeding themselves year after year, with their roots
staying put and growing ever longer and deeper. This combination of diversity
and perennialism keeps soil healthy, stable, and fertile: the roots hold the soil in
place, the plants allow rain water to be more safely slowly absorbed, and
different plants provide different fertility functions (some, like legumes and
clover, are better at fixing nitrogen, critical to forming the building blocks of
plant life), while diversity controls pests and invasive weeds.
It’s a self-sustaining cycle, with decomposing plants serving as natural
fertilizer for new plants and the life cycle being constantly renewed.
Maintaining this cycle, according to the farmer and philosopher Wendell Berry,
must be the centerpiece of humanity’s relationship with nature. “The problem
of sustainability is simple enough to state,” he says. “It requires that the fertility
cycle of birth, growth, maturity, death, and decay . . . should turn continuously
in place, so that the law of return is kept and nothing is wasted.”30 Simple
enough: respect fertility, keep it going.
But when humans started planting single crops that needed to be replanted
year after year, the problem of fertility loss began. The way industrial agriculture
deals with this problem is well known: irrigate heavily to make up for the fact
that annual plants do a poor job of retaining moisture (a growing problem as
fresh water becomes more scarce), and lay on the chemicals, both to fertilize and
ward off invasive pests and weeds.

This in turn creates a host of new environmental and health problems,
including massive aquatic dead zones caused by agricultural runoff. In other
words, rather than solving the fertility problem in the soil, we have simply
moved it, transforming a land-based crisis into an ocean-based one. And the
chain of infertility is longer still because some of the chemicals used in industrial
farming are endocrine disruptors such as the herb killer atrazine, which research
shows causes sterility in amphibians, fish, reptiles, and rats—as well as triggering
bizarre spontaneous sex changes in male frogs. And these same chemicals have
been linked to increased incidence of birth defects and miscarriages in humans,
though the manufacturer of atrazine disputes all these links. Honeybees,
meanwhile, our most critical natural pollinators, are under threat around the
world—another victim, many experts say, of agriculture’s chemical
dependency.31
Many traditional agricultural societies have developed methods to maintain
soil fertility despite planting annual crops. The maize-growing cultures of
Mesoamerica, for example, allowed fields to lie fallow so they could regenerate
and incorporated nitrogen-fixing legumes such as beans into mixtures of crops
grown side by side. These methods, which mimic the way similar plants grow in
the wild, have succeeded in keeping land fertile for thousands of years. Healthy
soil also has the added bonus of sequestering carbon (helping to control
emissions), and polycultures are less vulnerable to being wiped out by extreme
weather.32
Wes Jackson and his colleagues at the Land Institute are taking this approach
one step further: they are trying to remake the way industrial societies produce
grains by breeding perennial varieties of wheat, wheatgrass, sorghum, and
sunflowers that do not need to be replanted every year—just like the original
tall grasses that dominated the prairie landscape before large-scale agriculture
began. “Our goal is to fashion an agriculture as sustainable as the native
ecosystems it displaced,” the institute’s literature explains, “to find a way of
growing crops that rewards the farmer and the landscape more than the
manufacturers of external inputs. We envision an agriculture that not only
protects irreplaceable soil, but lessens our dependence on fossil fuels and
damaging synthetic chemicals.”33
And it is beginning to work: when I first visited the institute in 2010, the gift
shop had started selling the first batch of flour made from perennial wheatgrass
that Jackson and his team have domesticated and dubbed Kernza. When I
returned a year later, the Southern Plains were in the grip of a devastating crop-

destroying drought. Texas was having its driest year on record, with wheat, corn,
and sorghum down 50–60 percent and agricultural losses topping $7 billion;34
And yet the test sorghum field at the Land Institute was robust and healthy, the
plants’ long roots able to hold onto even tiny amounts of water. It was the only
patch of green for miles around.
It was right around then that my son was conceived. For the first few months,
the hardest part of the pregnancy was believing that everything really was
normal and healthy. No matter how many tests came back with reassuring
results, I stayed braced for tragedy. What helped most was hiking, and during
the final anxious weeks before the birth, I would calm my nerves by walking for
as long as my sore hips would let me on a well-groomed trail along a pristine
creek. The stream begins near the top of a snowcapped mountain and the clear
water rushes down a waterfall, gathers in dozens of pools, and flows through
rapids until it finally empties into the Pacific.
On these hikes, I would keep my eyes open for silvery salmon smolts making
their journey to the sea after months of incubation in shallow estuaries. And I
would picture the cohos, pinks, and chums swimming with all their might
through the rapids and falls, determined to reach the spawning grounds where
they were born. This was my son’s determination, I would tell myself. He was
clearly a fighter, having managed to make his way to me despite the odds; he
would find a way to be born safely too.
You can’t ask for a better symbol of the tenacity of life than the Pacific
salmon. To reach their spawning grounds, cohos will leap up massive waterfalls
like deranged kayakers in reverse, dodging eagles and grizzly bears. At the end of
their lives, salmon will expend their last life force to complete their mission.
Salmon fry must go through a dramatic physical transformation (smolting) to
prepare their bodies for the transition from freshwater to the oceans, where they
will live out their lives until it is their turn to make the journey upstream.
But these triumphant feats of biology are only one part of the story of
regeneration. Because as everyone who lives in salmon country knows,
sometimes the autumn streams are eerily empty, filled with nothing but dead
leaves, and perhaps one or two mottled fish. The salmon are indeed our
Olympic athletes, their determination one of the planet’s most powerful
expressions of the drive to carry on the life cycle—but they are not invincible.
Their strength can be defeated by overfishing, by fish farming operations that

spread sea lice that kill young salmon in droves, by warming waters that
scientists believe may threaten their food supply, by careless logging operations
that leave spawning streams clogged with debris, by concrete dams that defy
even the most acrobatic cohos. And of course they can be stopped dead in their
tracks by oil spills and other industrial accidents.
All of which is why salmon have disappeared from about 40 percent of their
historical range in the Pacific Northwest and several populations of coho,
chinook, and sockeye are under perpetual threat and at risk of extinction.35 To
know where these kinds of numbers lead, we need only look to New England
and Continental Europe, where commercial runs of Atlantic salmon have
disappeared from the rivers where they once were plentiful. Like humans,
salmon can overcome an awful lot—but not everything.
Which is why the happy ending to my own story still makes me uneasy, and
feels incomplete. I know that for some, my fertility saga seems to reinforce the
idea that human resilience will always conquer in the end, but that’s not what it
feels like. I don’t know why this pregnancy succeeded any more than I know
why my earlier pregnancies failed—and neither do my doctors, whether of the
high-tech or low-tech varieties. Infertility is just one of the many areas in which
we humans are confronted with our oceans of ignorance. So mostly I feel lucky
—like I could just as easily have failed, no matter how serene my life became,
having pushed my system too far. And it’s also possible that I could have ended
up with a cute baby picture on the wall of the frenetic fertility factory if I had
been willing to keep upping the technological ante.
I suppose a part of me is still in that oiled Louisiana marsh, floating in a sea of
poisoned larvae and embryos, with my own ill-fated embryo inside me. It’s not
self-pity that keeps me returning to that sad place. It’s the conviction that there
is something valuable in the body-memory of slamming up against a biological
limit—of running out of second, third, and fourth chances—something that we
all need to learn. Hitting the wall didn’t dispel my belief in healing and
recovery. It just taught me that these gifts require a special kind of nurturing,
and a constant vigilance about the limits beyond which life cannot be pushed.
Because the truth is that humans are marvelously resilient, capable of
adapting to all manner of setbacks. We are built to survive, gifted with
adrenaline and embedded with multiple biological redundancies that allow us
the luxury of second, third, and fourth chances. So are our oceans. So is the
atmosphere. But surviving is not the same as thriving, not the same as living
well. And as we have seen, for a great many species it’s not the same as being

able to nurture and produce new life. Just because biology is full of generosity
does not mean its forgiveness is limitless. With proper care, we stretch and bend
amazingly well. But we break too—our individual bodies, as well as the
communities and ecosystems that support us.

Coming Back to Life
In early 2013, I came across a speech by Mississauga Nishnaabeg writer and
educator Leanne Simpson, in which she describes her people’s teachings and
governance structures like this: “Our systems are designed to promote more
life.”36 The statement stopped me in my tracks. It struck me that this guiding
purpose was the very antithesis of extractivism, which is based on the premise
that life can be drained indefinitely, and which, far from promoting future life,
specializes in turning living systems into garbage, whether it’s the piles of
“overburden” lining the roads in the Alberta tar sands, or the armies of
discarded people roving the world looking for temporary work, or the
particulates and gases that choke the atmosphere that were once healthy parts
of ecosystems. Or, indeed, the cities and towns turned to rubble after being hit
by storms made more powerful by the heat those gases are trapping.
After listening to the speech, I wrote to Simpson and asked whether she
would be willing to tell me more about what lay behind that statement. When
we met at a Toronto cafe, I could tell that Simpson, in a black rocker T-shirt
and motorcycle boots, was wary of having her own mind mined by yet another
white researcher, having devoted a great deal of her life to collecting,
translating, and artistically interpreting her people’s oral histories and stories.
We ended up having a long, wide-ranging conversation about the difference
between an extractivist mindset (which Simpson describes bluntly as “stealing”
and taking things “out of relationship”) and a regenerative one. She described
Anishinaabe systems as “a way of living designed to generate life, not just
human life but the life of all living things.” This is a concept of balance, or
harmony, common to many Indigenous cultures and is often translated to mean
“the good life.” But Simpson told me that she preferred the translation
“continuous rebirth,” which she first heard from fellow Anishinaabe writer and
activist Winona LaDuke.37
It’s understandable that we associate these ideas today with an Indigenous
worldview: it is primarily such cultures that have kept this alternate way of

seeing the world alive in the face of the bulldozers of colonialism and corporate
globalization. Like seed savers safeguarding the biodiversity of the global seed
stock, other ways of relating to the natural world and one another have been
safeguarded by many Indigenous cultures, based partly on a belief that a time
will come when these intellectual seeds will be needed and the ground for them
will become fertile once again.
One of the most important developments in the emergence of what I have
been referring to as Blockadia is that, as this movement has taken shape, and as
Indigenous people have taken on leadership roles within it, these long protected
ways of seeing are spreading in a way that has not occurred for centuries. What
is emerging, in fact, is a new kind of reproductive rights movement, one fighting
not only for the reproductive rights of women, but for the reproductive rights of
the planet as a whole—for the decapitated mountains, the drowned valleys, the
clear-cut forests, the fracked water tables, the strip-mined hillsides, the poisoned
rivers, the “cancer villages.” All of life has the right to renew, regenerate, and
heal itself.
Based on this principle, countries like Bolivia and Ecuador—with large
Indigenous populations—have enshrined the “rights of Mother Earth” into law,
creating powerful new legal tools that assert the right of ecosystems not only to
exist but to “regenerate.”III38 The gender essentialism of the term still makes
some people uncomfortable. But it seems to me that the specifically female
nature is not of central importance. Whether we choose to see the earth as a
mother, a father, a parent, or an ungendered force of creation, what matters is
that we are acknowledging that we are not in charge, that we are part of a vast
living system on which we depend. The earth, wrote the great ecologist Stan
Rowe, is not merely “resource” but “source.”
These legal concepts are now being adopted and proposed in non-Indigenous
contexts, including in North America and Europe, where increasingly,
communities trying to protect themselves from the risks of extreme extraction
are passing their own “rights of nature” ordinances. In 2010 the Pittsburgh City
Council passed such a law, explicitly banning all natural gas extraction and
stating that nature has “inalienable and fundamental rights to exist and flourish”
in the city. A similar effort in Europe is attempting to make ecocide a crime
under international law. The campaign defines ecocide as “the extensive
damage to, destruction of or loss of ecosystem(s) of a given territory, whether by
human agency or by other causes, to such an extent that peaceful enjoyment by
the inhabitants of that territory has been or will be severely diminished.”39

As Indigenous-inspired ideas have spread in these somewhat surprising
contexts, something else is happening too: many people are remembering their
own cultures’ stewardship traditions, however deeply buried, and recognizing
humanity’s role as one of life promotion. The notion that we could separate
ourselves from nature, that we did not need to be in perpetual partnership with
the earth around us, is, after all, a relatively new concept, even in the West.
Indeed it was only once humans came up with the lethal concept of the earth as
an inert machine and man its engineer, that some began to forget the duty to
protect and promote the natural cycles of regeneration on which we all depend.
The good news is that not everybody agreed to forget. Another of the more
interesting and unexpected side effects of the extreme energy frenzy is that,
faced with heightened threats to collective safety, these old ideas are reasserting
themselves—cross-pollinating, hybridizing, and finding applications in new
contexts.
In Halkidiki, Greece, for instance, as villagers defend their land against openpit gold mining, the secret weapon has been the intergenerational character of
the struggle—teenage girls in skinny jeans and big sunglasses standing side by
side with their black-clad grandmothers in orthopedic shoes. This is something
new: before the miners threatened the mountain and the streams, many old
people had been forgotten, parked at home in front of their TVs, stuffed away
like outdated cell phones. But as the villages organized, local young people
discovered that, though they were expert at certain things, like flash-mob-style
organizing and getting their messages out on social media, their grandparents—
who had survived wars and occupations—knew a great deal more about living
and working in large groups. Not only could they cook for fifty people (an
important skill on the barricades), but they remembered a time when agriculture
was done collectively, and were able to help their children and grandchildren
believe that it was possible to live well without tearing up the land.
In “young” countries like Canada, the United States, Australia, and New
Zealand, which tend to have myths rather than memories, this remembering
process is far more complex. For descendants of settlers and newer immigrants, it
begins with learning the true histories of where we live—with reading treaties,
for instance, and coming to terms with how we ended up with what we have,
however painful. And yet Mike Scott, the goat rancher and environmentalist at
the forefront of Montana’s anti-coal fight, says that the process of Indigenous
and non-Indigenous people working closely together “has reawakened a
worldview in a lot of people.”40

The deep sense of interdependence with the natural world that animates
rural Blockadia struggles from Greece to coastal British Columbia is, of course,
far less obvious in the densely populated cities where so many of us live and
work: where our reliance on nature is well hidden by highways, pipes, electrical
lines, and overstocked supermarkets. It is only when something in this
elaborately insulated system cracks, or comes under threat, that we catch
glimpses of how dependent and vulnerable we really are.
And yet these cracks are appearing with greater regularity. At a time when
unprecedented wildfires engulf suburban homes in Melbourne, when waters
from the rising Thames flood homes in London commuter towns, and when
Superstorm Sandy transforms the New York subway into a canal system, the
barriers that even the most urban and privileged among us have erected to hold
back the natural world are clearly starting to break down.
Sometimes it is extreme extraction that breaks down those barriers, as its
tentacles creep into our most modern cities—with fracking in backyards in Los
Angeles and proposed tar sands pipelines running through cities like Toronto.
Sydney’s residents had little reason to think about where their drinking water
was coming from—but when it looked like the source of the Australian city’s
water was going to get fracked, a great many people educated themselves fast. In
truth, we never lost our connections with nature—they were always there, in
our bodies and under our paved lives. A great many of us just forgot about them
for a while.
As communities move from simply resisting extractivism to constructing the
world that must rise in its rubble, protecting the fertility cycle is at the heart of
the most rapidly multiplying models, from permaculture to living buildings to
rainwater harvesting. Again and again, linear, one-way relationships of pure
extraction are being replaced with systems that are circular and reciprocal.
Seeds are saved instead of purchased. Water is recycled. Animal manure, not
chemicals, is used as fertilizer, and so on. There are no hard-and-fast formulas,
since the guiding principle is that every geography is different and our job, as
Wes Jackson says (citing Alexander Pope), is to “consult the genius of the
place.”41 There is, however, a recurring pattern: systems are being created that
require minimal external inputs and produce almost no waste—a quest for
homeostasis that is the opposite of the Monster Earth that the would-be
geoengineers tell us we must learn to love.

And contrary to capitalism’s drift toward monopoly and duopoly in virtually
every arena, these systems mimic nature’s genius for built-in redundancy by
amplifying diversity wherever possible, from more seed varieties to more sources
of energy and water. The goal becomes not to build a few gigantic green
solutions, but to infinitely multiply smaller ones, and to use policies—like
Germany’s feed-in tariff for renewable energy, for instance—that encourage
multiplication rather than consolidation. The beauty of these models is that
when they fail, they fail on a small and manageable scale—with backup systems
in place. Because if there is one thing we know, it’s that the future is going to
have plenty of shocks.
Living nonextractively does not mean that extraction does not happen: all
living things must take from nature in order to survive. But it does mean the
end of the extractivist mindset—of taking without caretaking, of treating land
and people as resources to deplete rather than as complex entities with rights to
a dignified existence based on renewal and regeneration. Even such traditionally
destructive practices as logging can be done responsibly, as can small-scale
mining, particularly when the activities are controlled by the people who live
where the extraction is taking place and who have a stake in the ongoing health
and productivity of the land. But most of all, living nonextractively means
relying overwhelmingly on resources that can be continuously regenerated:
deriving our food from farming methods that protect soil fertility; our energy
from methods that harness the ever-renewing strength of the sun, wind, and
waves; our metals from recycled and reused sources.
These processes are sometimes called “resilient” but a more appropriate term
might be “regenerative.” Because resilience—though certainly one of nature’s
greatest gifts—is a passive process, implying the ability to absorb blows and get
back up. Regeneration, on the other hand, is active: we become full participants
in the process of maximizing life’s creativity.
This is a far more expansive vision than the familiar eco-critique that stressed
smallness and shrinking humanity’s impact or “footprint.” That is simply not an
option today, not without genocidal implications: we are here, we are many, and
we must use our skills to act. We can, however, change the nature of our actions
so that they are constantly growing, rather than extracting life. “We can build
soil, pollinate, compost and decompose,” Gopal Dayaneni, a grassroots ecologist
and activist with the Oakland, California, based Movement Generation, told
me. “We can accelerate, simply though our labor, the restoration and
regeneration of living systems, if we engage in thoughtful, concerted action. We

are actually the keystone species in this moment so we have to align our
strategies with the healing powers of Mother Earth—there is no getting around
the house rules. But it isn’t about stopping or retreating. It’s about aggressively
applying our labor toward restoration.”42
That spirit is already busily at work promoting and protecting life in the face
of so many life-negating and life-forgetting threats. It has even reached the
creek where I used to take hikes during my pregnancy. When I first discovered
the trail, I had thought that the salmon that still swam in the stream were there
purely thanks to the species’ indomitable will. But as I met and spoke with locals
on those walks, I learned that since 1992 the fish had been helped along by a
hatchery a few kilometers upstream, as well as by teams of volunteers that
worked to clear the water of logging debris and made sure there was enough
shade to protect the young fry. Hundreds of thousands of pink, coho, chum, and
chinook fry are released into nearby streams each year. It’s a partnership of sorts
between the fish, the forest, and the people who share this special piece of the
world.
So about two months after my son was born, our little family went on a field
trip to that hatchery, now being powered through micro turbines and
geothermal. Though he was so small he could barely see over the sling, I wanted
him to meet some of the baby salmon that had been so important to me before
he was born. It was fun: we peered together into the big green tanks where the
young fish were being kept safe until they grew strong enough to protect
themselves. And we went home with a “salmon alphabet” poster that still hangs
in his room (“s” is for smolt).
This was not a fish farm or a fertility factory—nothing was being created
from scratch or forced. It was just a helping hand, a boost to keep the fertility
cycle going. And it’s an expression of the understanding that from here on,
when we take, we must not only give back, but we must also take care.

I. The dolphin die-off did not restrict itself to the young. By the end of April 2014, over one thousand
dead dolphins, of all ages, had been discovered along the Gulf Coast, part of what NOAA termed an
“unusual mortality event.” Those numbers only scratch the surface of the death toll.
II. New research published in May 2014 in the journal Human Reproduction shows a strong connection
between stress and infertility. The study followed roughly five hundred women in the U.S. as they were
trying to conceive, none of them with known fertility problems. It discovered that women whose saliva
measured high for alpha-amylase—a biomarker for stress—were twice as likely to be diagnosed as infertile
as those with low levels.

III. When Ecuador adopted a new constitution in 2008, it became the first country to enshrine the rights
of nature in law. Article 71 of the country’s constitution states: “Nature or Pachamama, where the life is
created and reproduced, has as a right that its existence is integrally respected as well as the right of the
maintenance and regeneration of its vital cycles, structures, functions and evolutionary processes. Every
person, community, people or nationality can demand from the public authority that these rights of nature
are fulfilled.” Similar principles were enshrined in the “Peoples Agreement” of the World People’s
Conference on Climate Change and the Rights of Mother Earth, which was adopted by 30,000 members of
international civil society gathered in Cochabamba, Bolivia, in April 2010. Noting that, “the regenerative
capacity of the planet has been already exceeded,” the agreement asserts that the earth has “the right to
regenerate its bio-capacity and to continue its vital cycles and processes free of human alteration.”

Conclusion

The Leap Years
Just Enough Time for Impossible
“We as a nation must undergo a radical revolution of values. We must rapidly begin the
shift from a ‘thing-oriented society’ to a ‘person-oriented society.’ When machines and
computers, profit motives and property rights, are considered more important than people,
the giant triplets of racism, extreme materialism, and militarism are incapable of being
conquered.”
—Martin Luther King Jr., “Beyond Vietnam,” 19671

“Developed countries have created a global crisis based on a flawed system of values. There
is no reason we should be forced to accept a solution informed by that same system.”
—Marlene Moses, Ambassador to the U.N. for Nauru, 20092

In December 2012, Brad Werner—a complex systems researcher with pink hair
and a serious expression—made his way through the throng of 24,000 earth and
space scientists at the Fall Meeting of the American Geophysical Union in San
Francisco. That year’s conference had some big-name participants, from Ed
Stone of NASA’s Voyager project, explaining a new milestone on the path to
interstellar space, to the filmmaker James Cameron, discussing his adventures in
deep-sea submersibles. But it was Werner’s own session that was attracting much
of the buzz. It was titled “Is Earth F**ked?” (full title: “Is Earth F**ked?
Dynamical Futility of Global Environmental Management and Possibilities for
Sustainability via Direct Action Activism”).3
Standing at the front of the conference room, the University of California,
San Diego professor took the crowd through the advanced computer model he
was using to answer that rather direct question. He talked about system

boundaries, perturbations, dissipation, attractors, bifurcations, and a whole
bunch of other stuff largely incomprehensible to those of us uninitiated in
complex systems theory. But the bottom line was clear enough: global capitalism
has made the depletion of resources so rapid, convenient, and barrier-free that
“earth-human systems” are becoming dangerously unstable in response. When a
journalist pressed Werner for a clear answer on the “Is Earth f**ked” question,
he set the jargon aside and replied, “More or less.”4
There was one dynamic in the model, however, that offered some hope.
Werner described it as “resistance”—movements of “people or groups of people”
who “adopt a certain set of dynamics that does not fit within the capitalist
culture.” According to the abstract for his presentation, this includes
“environmental direct action, resistance taken from outside the dominant
culture, as in protests, blockades and sabotage by Indigenous peoples, workers,
anarchists and other activist groups.” Such mass uprisings of people—along the
lines of the abolition movement and the civil rights movement—represent the
likeliest source of “friction” to slow down an economic machine that is
careening out of control.5
This, he argued, is clear from history, which tells us that past social
movements have “had tremendous influence on . . . how the dominant culture
evolved.” It stands to reason, therefore, that “if we’re thinking about the future
of the earth, and the future of our coupling to the environment, we have to
include resistance as part of that dynamics.” And that, Werner said, is not a
matter of opinion, but “really a geophysics problem.”6
Put another way, only mass social movements can save us now. Because we
know where the current system, left unchecked, is headed. We also know, I
would add, how that system will deal with the reality of serial climate-related
disasters: with profiteering, and escalating barbarism to segregate the losers from
the winners. To arrive at that dystopia, all we need to do is keep barreling down
the road we are on. The only remaining variable is whether some countervailing
power will emerge to block the road, and simultaneously clear some alternate
pathways to destinations that are safer. If that happens, well, it changes
everything.
The movements explored in these pages—Blockadia’s fast multiplying local
outposts, the fossil fuel divestment/reinvestment movement, the local laws
barring high-risk extraction, the bold court challenges by Indigenous groups and

others—are early manifestations of this resistance. They have not only located
various choke points to slow the expansion plans of the fossil fuel companies,
but the economic alternatives these movements are proposing and building are
mapping ways of living within planetary boundaries, ones based on intricate
reciprocal relationships rather than brute extraction. This is the “friction” to
which Werner referred, the kind that is needed to put the brakes on the forces
of destruction and destabilization.
When I despair of the prospects for change, I think back on some of what I
have witnessed in the five years of writing of this book. Admittedly, much of it
is painful. From the young climate activist breaking down and weeping on my
shoulder at the Copenhagen summit, to the climate change deniers at the
Heartland Institute literally laughing at the prospect of extinction. From the
country manor in England where mad scientists plotted to blot out the sun, to
the stillness of the blackened marshes during the BP oil disaster. From the roar
of the earth being ripped up to scrape out the Alberta tar sands, to the shock of
discovering that the largest green group in the world was itself drilling for oil.
But that’s not all I think about. When I started this journey, most of the
resistance movements standing in the way of the fossil fuel frenzy either did not
exist or were a fraction of their current size. All were significantly more isolated
from one another than they are today. North Americans, overwhelmingly, did
not know what the tar sands were. Most of us had never heard of fracking.
There had never been a truly mass march against climate change in North
America, let alone thousands willing to engage together in civil disobedience.
There was no mass movement to divest from fossil fuels. Hundreds of cities and
towns in Germany had not yet voted to take back control over their electricity
grids to be part of a renewable energy revolution. My own province did not have
a green energy program that was bold enough to land us in trade court. The
environmental news out of China was almost exclusively awful. There was far
less top-level research proving that economies powered by 100 percent
renewable energy were within our grasp. Only the isolated few dared question
the logic of economic growth. And few climate scientists were willing to speak
bluntly about the political implications of their work for our frenzied consumer
culture. All of this has changed so rapidly as I have been writing that I have had
to race to keep up. Yes, ice sheets are melting faster than the models projected,
but resistance is beginning to boil. In these existing and nascent movements we
now have a clear glimpses of the kind of dedication and imagination demanded
of everyone who is alive and breathing during climate change’s “decade zero.”

Because the carbon record doesn’t lie. And what that record tells us is that
emissions are still rising: every year we release more greenhouse gases than the
year before, the growth rate increasing from one decade to the next—gases that
will trap heat for generations to come, creating a world that is hotter, colder,
wetter, thirstier, hungrier, angrier. So if there is any hope of reversing these
trends, glimpses won’t cut it; we will need the climate revolution playing on
repeat, all day every day, everywhere.
Werner was right to point out that mass resistance movements have grabbed
the wheel before and could very well do so again. At the same time, we must
reckon with the fact that lowering global emissions in line with climate
scientists’ urgent warnings demands changes of a truly daunting speed and scale.
Meeting science-based targets will mean forcing some of the most profitable
companies on the planet to forfeit trillions of dollars of future earnings by
leaving the vast majority of proven fossil fuel reserves in the ground.7 It will also
require coming up with trillions more to pay for zero-carbon, disaster-ready
societal transformations. And let’s take for granted that we want to do these
radical things democratically and without a bloodbath, so violent, vanguardist
revolutions don’t have much to offer in the way of road maps.
The crucial question we are left with, then, is this: has an economic shift of
this kind ever happened before in history? We know it can happen during
wartime, when presidents and prime ministers are the ones commanding the
transformation from above. But has it ever been demanded from below, by
regular people, when leaders have wholly abdicated their responsibilities?
Having combed through the history of social movements in search of
precedents, I must report that the answer to that question is predictably
complex, filled with “sort ofs” and “almosts”—but also at least one “yes.”
In the West, the most common precedents invoked to show that social
movements really can be a disruptive historical force are the celebrated human
rights movements of the past century—most prominently, civil, women’s, and
gay and lesbian rights. And these movements unquestionably transformed the
face and texture of the dominant culture. But given that the challenge for the
climate movement hinges on pulling off a profound and radical economic
transformation, it must be noted that for these movements, the legal and
cultural battles were always more successful than the economic ones.
The U.S. civil rights movement, for instance, fought not only against
legalized segregation and discrimination but also for massive investments in
schools and jobs programs that would close the economic gap between blacks

and whites once and for all. In his 1967 book, Where Do We Go from Here:
Chaos or Community?, Martin Luther King Jr. pointed out that, “The practical
cost of change for the nation up to this point has been cheap. The limited
reforms have been obtained at bargain rates. There are no expenses, and no
taxes are required, for Negroes to share lunch counters, libraries, parks, hotels
and other facilities with whites. . . . The real cost lies ahead. . . . The discount
education given Negroes will in the future have to be purchased at full price if
quality education is to be realized. Jobs are harder and costlier to create than
voting rolls. The eradication of slums housing millions is complex far beyond
integrating buses and lunch counters.”8
And though often forgotten, the more radical wing of the second-wave
feminist movement also argued for fundamental challenges to the free market
economic order. It wanted women not only to get equal pay for equal work in
traditional jobs but to have their work in the home caring for children and the
elderly recognized and compensated as a massive unacknowledged market
subsidy—essentially a demand for wealth redistribution on a scale greater than
the New Deal.
But as we know, while these movements won huge battles against
institutional discrimination, the victories that remained elusive were those that,
in King’s words, could not be purchased “at bargain rates.” There would be no
massive investments in jobs, schools, and decent homes for African Americans,
just as the 1970s women’s movement would not win its demand for “wages for
housework” (indeed paid maternity leave remains a battle in large parts of the
world). Sharing legal status is one thing; sharing resources quite another.
If there is an exception to this rule it is the huge gains won by the labor
movement in the aftermath of the Great Depression—the massive wave of
unionization that forced owners to share a great deal more wealth with their
workers, which in turn helped create a context to demand ambitious social
programs like Social Security and unemployment insurance (programs from
which the majority of African American and many women workers were
notably excluded). And in response to the market crash of 1929, tough new
rules regulating the financial sector were introduced at real cost to unfettered
profit making. In the same period, social movement pressure created the
conditions for the New Deal and programs like it across the industrialized world.
These made massive investments in public infrastructure—utilities,
transportation systems, housing, and more—on a scale comparable to what the
climate crisis calls for today.

If the search for historical precedents is extended more globally (an
impossibly large task in this context, but worth a try), then the lessons are
similarly mixed. Since the 1950s, several democratically elected socialist
governments have nationalized large parts of their extractive sectors and begun
to redistribute to the poor and middle class the wealth that had previously
hemorrhaged into foreign bank accounts, most notably Mohammad Mosaddegh
in Iran and Salvador Allende in Chile. But those experiments were interrupted
by foreign-sponsored coups d’état before reaching their potential. Indeed
postcolonial independence movements—which so often had the redistribution
of unjustly concentrated resources, whether of land or minerals, as their core
missions—were consistently undermined through political assassinations,
foreign interference, and, more recently, the chains of debt-driven structural
adjustment programs (not to mention the corruption of local elites).
Even the stunningly successful battle against apartheid in South Africa
suffered its most significant losses on the economic equality front. The country’s
freedom fighters were not, it is worth remembering, only demanding the right to
vote and move freely. They were also, as the African National Congress’s
official policy platform, the Freedom Charter, made clear, struggling for key
sectors of the economy—including the mines and the banks—to be
nationalized, with their proceeds used to pay for the social programs that would
lift millions in the townships out of poverty. Black South Africans won their
core legal and electoral battles, but the wealth accumulated under apartheid
remained intact, with poverty deepening significantly in the post-apartheid era.9
There have been social movements, however, that have succeeded in
challenging entrenched wealth in ways that are comparable to what today’s
movements must provoke if we are to avert climate catastrophe. These are the
movements for the abolition of slavery and for Third World independence from
colonial powers. Both of these transformative movements forced ruling elites to
relinquish practices that were still extraordinarily profitable, much as fossil fuel
extraction is today.
The movement for the abolition of slavery in particular shows us that a
transition as large as the one confronting us today has happened before—and
indeed it is remembered as one of the greatest moments in human history. The
economic impacts of slavery abolition in the mid-nineteenth century have some
striking parallels with the impacts of radical emission reduction, as several
historians and commentators have observed. Journalist and broadcaster Chris
Hayes, in an award-winning 2014 essay titled “The New Abolitionism,” pointed

out “the climate justice movement is demanding that an existing set of political
and economic interests be forced to say goodbye to trillions of dollars of wealth”
and concluded that “it is impossible to point to any precedent other than
abolition.”10
There is no question that for a large sector of the ruling class at the time,
losing the legal right to exploit men and women in bondage represented a major
economic blow, one as huge as the one players ranging from Exxon to Richard
Branson would have to take today. As the historian Greg Grandin has put it,
“In the realm of economics, the importance of slaves went well beyond the
wealth generated from their uncompensated labor. Slavery was the flywheel on
which America’s market revolution turned—not just in the United States, but
in all of the Americas.” In the eighteenth century, Caribbean sugar plantations,
which were wholly dependent on slave labor, were by far the most profitable
outposts of the British Empire, generating revenues that far outstripped the
other colonies. In Bury the Chains, Adam Hochschild quotes enthusiastic slave
traders describing the buying and selling of humans as “the hinge on which all
the trade of this globe moves” and “the foundation of our commerce . . . and first
cause of our national industry and riches.”11
While not equivalent, the dependency of the U.S. economy on slave labor—
particularly in the Southern states—is certainly comparable to the modern
global economy’s reliance on fossil fuels.I According to historian Eric Foner, at
the start of the Civil War, “slaves as property were worth more than all the
banks, factories and railroads in the country put together.” Strengthening the
parallel with fossil fuels, Hayes points out that “in 1860, slaves represented
about 16 percent of the total household assets—that is, all the wealth—in the
entire [United States], which in today’s terms is a stunning $10 trillion.” That
figure is very roughly similar to the value of the carbon reserves that must be left
in the ground worldwide if we are to have a good chance of keeping warming
below 2 degrees Celsius.12
But the analogy, as all acknowledge, is far from perfect. Burning fossil fuels is
of course not the moral equivalent of owning slaves or occupying countries.
(Though heading an oil company that actively sabotages climate science,
lobbies aggressively against emission controls while laying claim to enough
interred carbon to drown populous nations like Bangladesh and boil subSaharan Africa is indeed a heinous moral crime.) Nor were the movements that
ended slavery and defeated colonial rule in any way bloodless: nonviolent
tactics like boycotts and protests played major roles, but slavery in the

Caribbean was only outlawed after numerous slave rebellions were brutally
suppressed, and, of course, abolition in the United States came only after the
carnage of the Civil War.
Another problem with the analogy is that, though the liberation of millions
of slaves in this period—some 800,000 in the British colonies and four million
in the U.S.—represents the greatest human rights victory of its time (or,
arguably, any time), the economic side of the struggle was far less successful.
Local and international elites often managed to extract steep payoffs to
compensate themselves for their “losses” of human property, while offering little
or nothing to former slaves. Washington broke its promise, made near the end
of the Civil War, to grant freed slaves ownership of large swaths of land in the
U.S. South (a pledge known colloquially as “40 acres and a mule”). Instead the
lands were returned to former slave owners, who proceeded to staff them
through the indentured servitude of sharecropping. Britain, as discussed,
awarded massive paydays to its slave owners at the time of abolition. And
France, most shockingly, sent a flotilla of warships to demand that the newly
liberated nation of Haiti pay a huge sum to the French crown for the loss of its
bonded workforce—or face attack.13 Reparations, but in reverse.
The costs of these, and so many other gruesomely unjust extortions, are still
being paid in lives, from Haiti to Mozambique. The reverse-reparations saddled
newly liberated nations and people with odious debts that deprived them of true
independence while helping to accelerate Europe’s Industrial Revolution, the
extreme profitability of which most certainly cushioned the economic blow of
abolition. In sharp contrast, a real end to the fossil fuel age offers no equivalent
consolation prizes to the major players in the oil, gas, and coal industries. Solar
and wind can make money, sure. But by nature of their decentralization, they
will never supply the kind of concentrated super-profits to which the fossil fuel
titans have become all too accustomed. In other words, if climate justice carries
the day, the economic costs to our elites will be real—not only because of the
carbon left in the ground but also because of the regulations, taxes, and social
programs needed to make the required transformation. Indeed, these new
demands on the ultra rich could effectively bring the era of the footloose Davos
oligarch to a close.

The Unfinished Business of Liberation

On one level, the inability of many great social movements to fully realize those
parts of their visions that carried the highest price tags can be seen as a cause for
inertia or even despair. If they failed in their plans to usher in a more equitable
economic system, how can the climate movement hope to succeed?
There is, however, another way of looking at this track record: these
economic demands—for basic public services that work, for decent housing, for
land redistribution—represent nothing less than the unfinished business of the
most powerful liberation movements of the past two centuries, from civil rights
to feminism to Indigenous sovereignty. The massive global investments required
to respond to the climate threat—to adapt humanely and equitably to the heavy
weather we have already locked in, and to avert the truly catastrophic warming
we can still avoid—is a chance to change all that; and to get it right this time. It
could deliver the equitable redistribution of agricultural lands that was supposed
to follow independence from colonial rule and dictatorship; it could bring the
jobs and homes that Martin Luther King dreamed of; it could bring jobs and
clean water to Native communities; it could at last turn on the lights and
running water in every South African township. Such is the promise of a
Marshall Plan for the Earth.
The fact that our most heroic social justice movements won on the legal
front but suffered big losses on the economic front is precisely why our world is
as fundamentally unequal and unfair as it remains. Those losses have left a
legacy of continued discrimination, double standards, and entrenched poverty—
poverty that deepens with each new crisis. But, at the same time, the economic
battles the movements did win are the reason we still have a few institutions left
—from libraries to mass transit to public hospitals—based on the wild idea that
real equality means equal access to the basic services that create a dignified life.
Most critically, all these past movements, in one form or another, are still
fighting today—for full human rights and equality regardless of ethnicity,
gender, or sexual orientation; for real decolonization and reparation; for food
security and farmers’ rights; against oligarchic rule; and to defend and expand
the public sphere.
So climate change does not need some shiny new movement that will
magically succeed where others failed. Rather, as the furthest-reaching crisis
created by the extractivist worldview, and one that puts humanity on a firm and
unyielding deadline, climate change can be the force—the grand push—that
will bring together all of these still living movements. A rushing river fed by
countless streams, gathering collective force to finally reach the sea. “The basic

confrontation which seemed to be colonialism versus anticolonialism, indeed
capitalism versus socialism, is already losing its importance,” Frantz Fanon wrote
in his 1961 masterwork, The Wretched of the Earth. “What matters today, the
issue which blocks the horizon, is the need for a redistribution of wealth.
Humanity will have to address this question, no matter how devastating the
consequences may be.”14 Climate change is our chance to right those festering
wrongs at last—the unfinished business of liberation.
Winning will certainly take the convergence of diverse constituencies on a
scale previously unknown. Because, although there is no perfect historical
analogy for the challenge of climate change, there are certainly lessons to learn
from the transformative movements of the past. One such lesson is that when
major shifts in the economic balance of power take place, they are invariably
the result of extraordinary levels of social mobilization. At those junctures,
activism becomes something that is not performed by a small tribe within a
culture, whether a vanguard of radicals or a subcategory of slick professionals
(though each play their part), but becomes an entirely normal activity
throughout society—it’s rent payers associations, women’s auxiliaries, gardening
clubs, neighborhood assemblies, trade unions, professional groups, sports teams,
youth leagues, and on and on. During extraordinary historical moments—both
world wars, the aftermath of the Great Depression, or the peak of the civil rights
era—the usual categories dividing “activists” and “regular people” became
meaningless because the project of changing society was so deeply woven into
the project of life. Activists were, quite simply, everyone.
Which brings us back to where we started: climate change and bad timing. It
must always be remembered that the greatest barrier to humanity rising to meet
the climate crisis is not that it is too late or that we don’t know what to do.
There is just enough time, and we are swamped with green tech and green plans.
And yet the reason so many of us are inclined to answer Brad Werner’s
provocative question in the affirmative is that we are afraid—with good reason
—that our political class is wholly incapable of seizing those tools and
implementing those plans, since doing so involves unlearning the core tenets of
the stifling free-market ideology that governed every stage of their rise to power.
And it’s not just the people we vote into office and then complain about—
it’s us. For most of us living in postindustrial societies, when we see the
crackling black-and-white footage of general strikes in the 1930s, victory
gardens in the 1940s, and Freedom Rides in the 1960s, we simply cannot
imagine being part of any mobilization of that depth and scale. That kind of

thing was fine for them but surely not us—with our eyes glued to smart phones,
attention spans scattered by click bait, loyalties split by the burdens of debt and
insecurities of contract work. Where would we organize? Who would we trust
enough to lead us? Who, moreover, is “we”?
In other words, we are products of our age and of a dominant ideological
project. One that too often has taught us to see ourselves as little more than
singular, gratification-seeking units, out to maximize our narrow advantage,
while simultaneously severing so many of us from the broader communities
whose pooled skills are capable of solving problems big and small. This project
also has led our governments to stand by helplessly for more than two decades as
the climate crisis morphed from a “grandchildren” problem to a banging-downthe-door problem.
All of this is why any attempt to rise to the climate challenge will be fruitless
unless it is understood as part of a much broader battle of worldviews, a process
of rebuilding and reinventing the very idea of the collective, the communal, the
commons, the civil, and the civic after so many decades of attack and neglect.
Because what is overwhelming about the climate challenge is that it requires
breaking so many rules at once—rules written into national laws and trade
agreements, as well as powerful unwritten rules that tell us that no government
can increase taxes and stay in power, or say no to major investments no matter
how damaging, or plan to gradually contract those parts of our economies that
endanger us all.
And yet each of those rules emerged out of the same, coherent worldview. If
that worldview is delegitimized, then all of the rules within it become much
weaker and more vulnerable. This is another lesson from social movement
history across the political spectrum: when fundamental change does come, it’s
generally not in legislative dribs and drabs spread out evenly over decades.
Rather it comes in spasms of rapid-fire lawmaking, with one breakthrough after
another. The right calls this “shock therapy”; the left calls it “populism” because
it requires so much popular support and mobilization to occur. (Think of the
regulatory architecture that emerged in the New Deal period, or, for that matter,
the environmental legislation of the 1960s and 1970s.)
So how do you change a worldview, an unquestioned ideology? Part of it
involves choosing the right early policy battles—game-changing ones that don’t
merely aim to change laws but change patterns of thought. That means that a
fight for a minimal carbon tax might do a lot less good than, for instance,
forming a grand coalition to demand a guaranteed minimum income. That’s not

only because a minimum income, as discussed, makes it possible for workers to
say no to dirty energy jobs but also because the very process of arguing for a
universal social safety net opens up a space for a full-throated debate about
values—about what we owe to one another based on our shared humanity, and
what it is that we collectively value more than economic growth and corporate
profits.
Indeed a great deal of the work of deep social change involves having debates
during which new stories can be told to replace the ones that have failed us.
Because if we are to have any hope of making the kind of civilizational leap
required of this fateful decade, we will need to start believing, once again, that
humanity is not hopelessly selfish and greedy—the image ceaselessly sold to us
by everything from reality shows to neoclassical economics.
Paradoxically, this may also give us a better understanding of our personal
climate inaction, allowing many of us to view past (and present) failures with
compassion, rather than angry judgment. What if part of the reason so many of
us have failed to act is not because we are too selfish to care about an abstract or
seemingly far-off problem—but because we are utterly overwhelmed by how
much we do care? And what if we stay silent not out of acquiesence but in part
because we lack the collective spaces in which to confront the raw terror of
ecocide? The end of the world as we know it, after all, is not something anyone
should have to face on their own. As the sociologist Kari Norgaard puts it in
Living in Denial, a fascinating exploration of the way almost all of us suppress the
full reality of the climate crisis, “Denial can—and I believe should—be
understood as testament to our human capacity for empathy, compassion, and
an underlying sense of moral imperative to respond, even as we fail to do so.”15
Fundamentally, the task is to articulate not just an alternative set of policy
proposals but an alternative worldview to rival the one at the heart of the
ecological crisis—embedded in interdependence rather than hyperindividualism, reciprocity rather than dominance, and cooperation rather than
hierarchy. This is required not only to create a political context to dramatically
lower emissions, but also to help us cope with the disasters we can no longer to
avoid. Because in the hot and stormy future we have already made inevitable
through our past emissions, an unshakable belief in the equal rights of all people
and a capacity for deep compassion will be the only things standing between
civilization and barbarism.
This is another lesson from the transformative movements of the past: all of
them understood that the process of shifting cultural values—though somewhat

ephemeral and difficult to quantify—was central to their work. And so they
dreamed in public, showed humanity a better version of itself, modeled different
values in their own behavior, and in the process liberated the political
imagination and rapidly altered the sense of what was possible. They were also
unafraid of the language of morality—to give the pragmatic, cost-benefit
arguments a rest and speak of right and wrong, of love and indignation.
In The Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith made a case against slavery that had
little to do with morality and everything to do with the bottom line. Work by
paid laborers, he argued, “comes cheaper in the end than that performed by
slaves”: not only were slave owners responsible for the high costs of the “wear
and tear” of their human property but, he claimed, paid laborers had a greater
incentive to work hard.16 Many abolitionists on both sides of the Atlantic
would embrace such pragmatic arguments.
However, as the push to abolish the slave trade (and later, slavery itself)
ramped up in Britain in the late eighteenth century, much of the movement put
considerably more emphasis on the moral travesties of slavery and the corrosive
worldview that made it possible. Writing in 1808, British abolitionist Thomas
Clarkson described the battle over the slave trade as “a contest between those
who felt deeply for the happiness and the honour of their fellow-creatures, and
those who, through vicious custom and the impulse of avarice, had trampled
under-foot the sacred rights of their nature, and had even attempted to efface all
title to the divine image from their minds.”17
The rhetoric and arguments of American abolitionists could be even starker
and more uncompromising. In an 1853 speech, the famed abolitionist orator
Wendell Phillips insisted on the right to denounce those who in the harshest
terms defended slavery. “Prove to me now that harsh rebuke, indignant
denunciation, scathing sarcasm, and pitiless ridicule are wholly and always
unjustifiable; else we dare not, in so desperate a case, throw away any weapon
which ever broke up the crust of an ignorant prejudice, roused a slumbering
conscience, shamed a proud sinner, or changed, in any way, the conduct of a
human being. Our aim is to alter public opinion.” And indispensable to that
goal were the voices of freed slaves themselves, people like Frederick Douglass,
who, in his writing and oratory, challenged the very foundations of American
patriotism with questions like “What, to the American slave, is your 4th of
July?”18
This kind of fiery, highly polarizing rhetoric was typical of a battle with so
much at stake. As the historian David Brion Davis writes, abolitionists

understood that their role was not merely to ban an abhorrent practice but to
try to change the deeply entrenched values that had made slavery acceptable in
the first place. “The abolition of New World slavery depended in large measure
on a major transformation in moral perception—on the emergence of writers,
speakers, and reformers, beginning in the mid-eighteenth century, who were
willing to condemn an institution that had been sanctioned for thousands of
years and who also strove to make human society something more than an
endless contest of greed and power.”19
This same understanding about the need to assert the intrinsic value of life is
at the heart of all major progressive victories, from universal suffrage to
universal health care. Though these movements all contained economic
arguments as part of building their case for justice, they did not win by putting a
monetary value on granting equal rights and freedoms. They won by asserting
that those rights and freedoms were too valuable to be measured and were
inherent to each of us. Similarly, there are plenty of solid economic arguments
for moving beyond fossil fuels, as more and more patient investors are realizing.
And that’s worth pointing out. But we will not win the battle for a stable
climate by trying to beat the bean counters at their own game—arguing, for
instance, that it is more cost-effective to invest in emission reduction now than
disaster response later. We will win by asserting that such calculations are
morally monstrous, since they imply that there is an acceptable price for
allowing entire countries to disappear, for leaving untold millions to die on
parched land, for depriving today’s children of their right to live in a world
teeming with the wonders and beauties of creation.
The climate movement has yet to find its full moral voice on the world stage,
but it is most certainly clearing its throat—beginning to put the very real thefts
and torments that ineluctably flow from the decision to mock international
climate commitments alongside history’s most damned crimes. Some of the
voices of moral clarity are coming from the very young, who are calling on the
streets and increasingly in the courts for intergenerational justice. Some are
coming from great social justice movements of the past, like Nobel laureate
Desmond Tutu, former archbishop of Cape Town, who has joined the fossil fuel
divestment movement with enthusiasm, declaring that “to serve as custodians of
creation is not an empty title; it requires that we act, and with all the urgency
this dire situation demands.”20 Most of all, those clarion voices are coming from
the front lines of Blockadia, from those lives most directly impacted by both
high-risk fossil fuel extraction and early climate destabilization.

Suddenly, Everyone
Recent years have been filled with moments when societies suddenly decide
they have had enough, defying all experts and forecasters—from the Arab
Spring (tragedies, betrayals, and all), to Europe’s “squares movement” that saw
city centers taken over by demonstrators for months, to Occupy Wall Street, to
the student movements of Chile and Quebec. The Mexican journalist Luis
Hernández Navarro describes those rare political moments that seem to melt
cynicism on contact as the “effervescence of rebellion.”21
What is most striking about these upwellings, when societies become
consumed with the demand for transformational change, is that they so often
come as a surprise—most of all to the movements’ own organizers. I’ve heard
the story many times: “One day it was just me and my friends dreaming up
impossible schemes, the next day the entire country seemed to be out in the
plaza alongside us.” And the real surprise, for all involved, is that we are so
much more than we have been told we are—that we long for more and in that
longing have more company than we ever imagined.
No one knows when the next such effervescent moment will open, or
whether it will be precipitated by an economic crisis, another natural disaster, or
some kind of political scandal. We do know that a warming world will, sadly,
provide no shortage of potential sparks. Sivan Kartha, senior scientist at the
Stockholm Environment Institute, puts it like this: “What’s politically realistic
today may have very little to do with what’s politically realistic after another
few Hurricane Katrinas and another few Superstorm Sandys and another few
Typhoon Bophas hit us.”22 It’s true: the world tends to look a little different
when the objects we have worked our whole lives to accumulate are suddenly
floating down the street, or smashed to pieces, turned to garbage.
The world also doesn’t look much like it did in the late 1980s. Climate
change, as we have seen, landed on the public agenda at the peak of free
market, end-of-history triumphalism, which was very bad timing indeed. Its door-die moment, however, comes to us at a very different historical juncture.
Many of the barriers that paralyzed a serious response to the crisis are today
significantly eroded. Free market ideology has been discredited by decades of
deepening inequality and corruption, stripping it of much of its persuasive power
(if not yet its political and economic power). And the various forms of magical
thinking that have diverted precious energy—from blind faith in technological
miracles to the worship of benevolent billionaires—are also fast losing their

grip. It is slowly dawning on a great many of us that no one is going to step in
and fix this crisis; that if change is to take place it will only be because
leadership bubbled up from below.
We are also significantly less isolated than many of us were even a decade
ago: the new structures built in the rubble of neoliberalism—everything from
social media to worker co-ops to farmer’s markets to neighborhood sharing
banks—have helped us to find community despite the fragmentation of
postmodern life. Indeed, thanks in particular to social media, a great many of us
are continually engaged in a cacophonous global conversation that, however
maddening it is at times, is unprecedented in its reach and power.
Given these factors, there is little doubt that another crisis will see us in the
streets and squares once again, taking us all by surprise. The real question is
what progressive forces will make of that moment, the power and confidence
with which it will be seized. Because these moments when the impossible seems
suddenly possible are excruciatingly rare and precious. That means more must
be made of them. The next time one arises, it must be harnessed not only to
denounce the world as it is, and build fleeting pockets of liberated space. It must
be the catalyst to actually build the world that will keep us all safe. The stakes
are simply too high, and time too short, to settle for anything less.
A year ago, I was having dinner with some newfound friends in Athens. I asked
them for ideas about what questions I should put to Alexis Tsipras, the young
leader of Greece’s official opposition party and one of the few sources of hope in
a Europe ravaged by austerity.
Someone suggested, “Ask him: History knocked on your door, did you
answer?”
That’s a good question, for all of us.

I. The reliance was certainly not limited to the Southern states: cutting-edge historical research has been
exploding long-held perceptions that the North and South of the United States had distinct and
irreconcilable economies in this period. In fact, Northern industrialists and Wall Street were far more
dependent on and connected to slavery than has often been assumed, and even some crucial innovations
in scientific management and accounting can be traced to the American plantation economy.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
One of the best decisions of my professional life was hiring Rajiv Sicora as lead
researcher on this project in early 2010. Far more than a top-notch researcher,
Rajiv has been a true intellectual companion on the long journey that produced
this book. He has synthesized mountains of material from wildly diverse fields,
sharing his own brilliant political analysis with me at every stage.
Rajiv was involved in all aspects of the book’s research, but his unique mark
can be felt in particular in the sections on trade, the psychology of climate
denial, the history of slavery abolition, climate debt, and anything and
everything related to climate science, including geoengineering. Rajiv’s breadth
of knowledge and command of this material is truly dazzling, as is the depth of
his commitment to this project and its subject matter. I am blessed to have had
him as a partner and friend throughout.
Two years ago, Rajiv and I were joined by Alexandra Tempus, another
exceptional and diligent journalist and researcher. Alexandra quickly mastered
her own roster of topics, from post–Superstorm Sandy disaster capitalism to
financialization of nature to the opaque world of green group and foundation
funding to climate impacts on fertility. She developed important new contacts,
uncovered new and shocking facts, and always shared her thoughtful analysis.
Both Rajiv and Alexandra communicated with and interviewed dozens of
experts. As this book went into its final stages and thousands of facts needed
sourcing, checking, rechecking, and legal vetting, I have been greatly moved by
their willingness to do whatever it took to get the job done, including far too
many nights without sleep. To be supported by two such serious and committed
colleagues is a true gift.
My next debt is to the team of tremendously tough and talented editors who
pushed me to continually improve the draft. A decade and a half after we first
published No Logo together, I am delighted to still have the honor of working
with Louise Dennys, the legendary and fearless publisher of Random House of
Canada. As always, my dear friend Louise knows me best, and pushes me hardest
editorialy, in the most encouraging way possible. Helen Conford at Penguin

U.K., a key collaborator on The Shock Doctrine, once again strengthened the
manuscript with her thoughtful queries and insights and continues to be an
inspiring publishing partner.
This is my first time publishing with Simon & Schuster in the U.S. and I
would not have made the move were it not for the visionary leadership of
Jonathan Karp and the editorial acumen of Bob Bender. I am so glad I did. They
took what I consider to have been a very feminist risk in signing an author who
was seven months pregnant, believing that the book would get written. It
clearly did, but not without its share of delays, and I will always be grateful for
their patience and fierce faith in this project. Bob, you have steered the editorial
group with grace and improved the manuscript again and again. Thank you.
I am so fortunate to have Amanda Urban as my agent, as well as her
wonderful colleagues Karolina Sutton and Helen Manders. They continue to
find the perfect publishing collaborators around the world and are the most
loyal friends and fighters when things get tough. I adore you guys.
And then there is Jackie Joiner: the woman who runs my life as well as Klein
Lewis Productions, our little book and movie-making outfit. Only Jackie could
have managed so many moving parts in a way that carved out the time and
space for me to both write this book and enjoy new motherhood. As we
approach launch, it is Jackie who will keep us from capsizing. Jackie, you are
family and Avi and I would be lost without you.
Debra Levy, my longtime research assistant, regrettably had to leave this
project in 2012. Before she did, she made enormous contributions, particularly
to the sections on geoengineering, messianic billionaires, and climate debt. She
also helped train Rajiv and Alexandra. She is one of the great collaborators of
my career and I miss her still.
In the final months before deadline, Alleen Brown and Lauren Sutherland
went above and beyond, helping enormously with the fact-check on absurdly
tight deadlines. Lauren also did dynamite research for the billionaires chapter.
Dave Oswald Mitchell contributed wise and comprehensive research on the
growth imperative, and Mara Kardas-Nelson did the same on local power
movements in Germany and Boulder.
Rajiv and I are also deeply grateful to the team of very busy climate scientists
who agreed to read sections of the book relating to climate change impacts and
projections. Our readers ended up being an all-star cast of scientific experts
including: Kevin Anderson (Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research),
Alice Bows-Larkin (Tyndall Centre), James Hansen (Columbia University),

Peter Gleick (Pacific Institute), and Sivan Kartha (Stockholm Environment
Institute), all of whom vetted large sections of the book for accuracy. Michael E.
Mann (Penn State University) and Olivia Serdeczny (Climate Analytics) also
looked over the projections of a 4-degree world and provided helpful feedback.
As a nonscientist, having this team of experts vet the accuracy of this material
was critical; all political conclusions drawn from those scientific findings are
mine alone and in no way reflect on these generous readers.
When Bill McKibben asked me to join the board of 350.org in 2011, I had no
idea what a wild ride it would be. Through the Keystone XL campaign and the
kickoff of the fossil fuel divestment movement, working with 350.org’s brilliant
team—particularly its imaginative executive director May Boeve—has given me
a front row seat to the fast changing climate justice movement partially
documented in these pages. Bill, you are one of the world’s truly great people, a
rock of a friend, and you wrote most of this years ago. I love being in this fight
with you. All views expressed here are my own and have nothing to do with
350.org as an organization.
Other experts in their respective fields who agreed to review sections of this
book for accuracy include Riley Dunlap, Aaron M. McCright, Robert Brulle,
Steven Shrybman, Oscar Reyes, Larry Lohmann, Patrick Bond, Tadzio Mueller,
and Tom Kruse. I am most grateful to all of them.
My dear friends Kyo Maclear, Eve Ensler, Betsy Reed, and Johann Hari all
read portions of the book and shared their great skills as writers and editors.
Johann, in fact, provided some of the most transformative editorial advice I
received, and I am forever in his debt. This unofficial, backroom publishing
team supported me in countless ways, from helping me come up with the right
title to endless conversations about the book’s themes.
My parents, Bonnie and Michael Klein, also provided helpful feedback, and
my father, who has spent a lifetime researching the risks of obstetrical
interventions and advocating for women’s health, acted as a laughably
overqualified research assistant in my investigations into the medical risks of
fertility treatments. I am particularly grateful to my brother Seth Klein for his
careful and detailed edit, and to all of his colleagues at the B.C. Canadian
Centre for Policy Alternatives for their groundbreaking work on climate justice.
My husband, Avi Lewis, is always my first reader and primary collaborator.
On this project we made it official: as I have been writing this book, Avi has
been directing a documentary film on the same subject, a parallel process that
often allowed us to research and travel together. The film work also fed into the

book and though the film credits will do the real job of thanking the people
involved, these acknowledgments would not be complete without some of our
film collaborators, including: Joslyn Barnes, Katie McKenna, Anadil Hossain,
Mary Lampson, Shane Hofeldt, Mark Ellam, Daniel Hewett, Chris Miller,
Nicolas Jolliet, Martin Lukacs, Michael Premo, Alex Kelly, Daphne Wysham,
Jacqueline Soohen, as well as Ellen Dorsey, Tom Kruse, Cara Mertes, and Amy
Rao for their tremendous support from the earliest days.
People we met and worked with in the field shaped this work in many ways,
including Theodoros Karyotis, Apostolis Fotiadis, Laura Gottesdiener, Crystal
Lameman, Alexis Bonogofsky, Mike Scott, Nastaran Mohit and Sofia Gallisá
Muriente, Wes Jackson, Phillip Whiteman Jr. and Lynette Two Bulls, David
Hollander, and Charles Kovach, among many more.
Others who shared their expertise above and beyond include Soren Ambrose,
Dan Apfel, Tom Athanasiou, Amy Bach, Diana Bronson, John Cavanagh, Stan
Cox, Brendan DeMelle, Almuth Ernsting, Joss Garman, Justin Guay, Jamie
Henn, Jess Housty, Steve Horn, Martin Khor, Kevin Koenig, F. Gerald Maples,
Lidy Nacpil, Michael Oppenheimer, Sam Randalls, Mark Randazzo, Janet
Redman, Alan Robock, Mark Schapiro, Scott Sinclair, Rachel Smolker, Ilana
Solomon, Matthew Stilwell, Jesse Swanhuyser, Sean Sweeney, Jim Thomas,
Kevin Trenberth, Aaron Viles, Ben West, Ivonne Yanez, and Adam
Zuckerman.
Many research institutions, NGOs, and media outlets provided valuable
support, and I am particularly grateful to the Climate Science Rapid Response
Team, DeSmogBlog, EJOLT (Environmental Justice Organisations, Liabilities
and Trade), the Pembina Institute, Greenpeace Canada, the Carbon Dioxide
Information Analysis Center, and Oil Change International. I rely heavily on
Grist and Climate Progress for my climate news, and the wonderful writers at
Orion for deeper analysis. And we would all be lost without Democracy Now!’s
unflagging commitment to covering climate when no one else will, providing
free transcripts for every interview.
Many books and reports are acknowledged in the text and notes, but I am
particularly grateful to: Mark Dowie for Losing Ground, Christine MacDonald
for Green Inc., Petra Bartosiewicz and Marissa Miley for The Too Polite
Revolution, and Herbert Docena for his writing on the history of carbon trading.
Andreas Malm’s work on the history of coal had a huge influence on me, as
have the complete works of Clive Hamilton. Leanne Betasamosake Simpson
helped me to understand the underlying logic of extractivism, and Renee

Lertzman, Kari Marie Norgaard, Sally Weintrobe, and Rosemary Randall made
me see climate change denial in a whole new light.
The political economy of the climate crisis is an incredibly dense field, and
there is no way I could possibly cite all the critical thinkers who laid the
foundation on which this book rests. Without hope of being exhaustive, let me
mention a few whose work has been particularly important to my education and
who have not been listed above: Joan Martínez Alier, Nnimmo Bassey, Robert
D. Bullard, Erik M. Conway, Herman Daly, Joshua Farley, John Bellamy Foster,
David Harvey, Richard Heinberg, Tim Jackson, Derrick Jensen, Van Jones,
Michael T. Klare, Winona LaDuke, Edgardo Lander, Carolyn Merchant, George
Monbiot, Naomi Oreskes, Christian Parenti, Ely Peredo, Andrew Ross, Juliet B.
Schor, Joni Seager, Andrew Simms, Pablo Solón, James Gustave Speth, Sandra
Steingraber, and Peter Victor.
Publishing is a finicky business, with more attention to detail than is at all
fashionable. I am so grateful to all the people who labored over these important
details, especially the stellar team at Simon & Schuster, including Johanna Li,
Ruth Fecych, Fred Chase, and Phil Metcalf. At Knopf/Random House Canada,
Amanda Lewis read diligently and contributed helpful editorial comments.
Scott Richardson at Random House of Canada is responsible for the book’s bold
cover design. No one but Scott could have produced a design that would have
convinced me to take my name off the cover of my own book. Thank you in
advance to the three talented and dedicated publicists responsible for launching
this book into the world: Julia Prosser at Simon & Schuster, Shona Cook at
Random House of Canada, and Annabel Huxley at Penguin U.K. And thanks,
too, to the lawyers who vetted this text: Brian MacLeod Rogers, Elisa Rivlin,
and David Hirst.
Other researchers and Nation interns dipped in and out of the project over its
five-year life, including: Jake Johnston, Dawn Paley, Michelle Chen, Kyla
Neilan, Natasja Sheriff, Sarah Woolf, Eric Wuestewald, Lisa Boscov-Ellen, Saif
Rahman, Diana Ruiz, Simon Davis-Cohen, Owen Davis, and Ryan Devereaux.
All did excellent work. Alonzo Ríos Mira provided invaluable help with
interview transcriptions, as did several others.
My writing continues to be supported by The Nation Institute, where I am a
Puffin Foundation Writing Fellow, and the Institute generously provided office
space to Rajiv throughout this project, while The Nation magazine did the same
for Alexandra. I am grateful to all my colleagues in the Nation orbit, in
particular my editor, Betsy Reed, as well as to Katrina vanden Heuvel, Peter

Rothberg, Richard Kim, Taya Kitman, Ruth Baldwin, and Esther Kaplan.
Special thanks also to the Wallace Global Fund, the Lannan Foundation, and
the NoVo Foundation for their support over the years.
Rajiv extends a special thank you to Hannah Shaw and to his parents, Durga
Mallampalli and Joseph Sicora. Alexandra does likewise to her parents, Robyn
and Kenneth Shingler, Kent Tempus, and Denise Sheedy-Tempus, and to her
grandmother Sandra Niswonger. We are all grateful for their understanding and
support through this long and immersive project.
Friends with whom I have an ongoing and enriching conversation on these
subjects include many of those listed above, as well as Justin Podur, Clayton
Thomas-Muller, Katharine Viner, Arthur Manuel, Harsha Walia, Andréa
Schmidt, Seumas Milne, Melina Laboucan-Massimo, Robert Jensen, Michael
Hardt, John Jordan, Raj Patel, Brendan Martin, Emma Ruby-Sachs, Jane Saks,
Tantoo Cardinal, and Jeremy Scahill. Gopal Dayaneni and the whole gang at
Movement Generation provide me with an ongoing education and no end of
inspiration. More personal thanks go to Misha Klein, Michele Landsberg,
Stephen Lewis, Frances Coady, Nancy Friedland, David Wall, Sarah Polley,
Kelly O’Brien, Cecilie Surasky and Carolyn Hunt, Sara Angel, Anthony
Arnove, Brenda Coughlin, John Greyson, Stephen Andrews, Anne Biringer,
Michael Sommers, Belinda Reyes, and Ofelia Whiteley.
My deepest thanks go to little Toma, for his truly heroic feats of toddler
patience. He is about to learn that the world is a lot bigger than our
neighborhood.

Photograph © Suzanne DeChillo/The New York Times/Redux NAOMI KLEIN is an award-winning journalist and the
author of the critically acclaimed #1 international bestseller The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism
and No Logo: Taking Aim at the Brand Bullies, which The New York Times called “a movement bible.” Klein is a
contributing editor for Harper’s magazine, a reporter for Rolling Stone, and a syndicated columnist for The
Nation and The Guardian. She is a member of the board of directors of 350.org and a Puffin Foundation Writing
Fellow at The Nation Institute.
MEET THE AUTHORS, WATCH VIDEOS AND MORE AT

SimonandSchuster.com
authors.simonandschuster.com/Naomi-Klein

ALSO BY NAOMI KLEIN
The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism
No Logo: Taking Aim at the Brand Bullies
Fences and Windows: Dispatches from the Front Lines of the Globalization Debate

We hope you enjoyed reading this Simon & Schuster eBook.
Join our mailing list and get updates on new releases, deals, bonus content and other great books from Simon
& Schuster.

CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP

or visit us online to sign up at
eBookNews.SimonandSchuster.com

NOTES
N.B.: In the interest of having an endnote section that is shorter than the main text, not every fact in the
book has a citation. Facts for which sources are provided include: all quotes, statistics, data points, and
facts relating to climate science and carbon mitigation, though often only when the fact first appears in the
text and not on repeat references. Facts that do not fall into these categories, but are controversial for some
reason, are also sourced.
Sources are not provided for references to uncontroversial facts (usually news events) that can be easily
confirmed with a keyword search. Facts that clearly come from the author’s personal reporting (but are not
quotes) are also generally not sourced.
In cases where there are sources for multiple facts and quotes in a paragraph, one superscript note
number appears at the end of the paragraph rather than a number after each individual fact. In the notes
section here, the sources are listed in the order in which the facts appear in the paragraph, unless otherwise
indicated. This has been done in the interest of achieving a less-cluttered text and further shortening the
length of the endnote section.
Quotations that come from interviews conducted by the author or her researchers (usually Rajiv Sicora
or Alexandra Tempus) or from the documentary film accompanying this book (directed by Avi Lewis)
appear in the endnotes as “personal interview.”
If there is a source for a footnote, it is cited in the numbered endnote most closely following the asterisk
in the text; such sources are marked FOOTNOTE.
Web addresses for news articles available online are not included because of the transient nature of Web
architecture. In cases where a document is available exclusively online, the home page where it appears is
cited, not the longer URL for the specific text, once again because links change frequently.
All dollar amounts in the book are in U.S. currency.
EPIGRAPHS
1. “Rebecca Tarbotton,” Rainforest Action Network, http://ran.org/becky.
2. Kim Stanley Robinson, “Earth: Under Repair Forever,” OnEarth, December 3, 2012.

INTRODUCTION
1. Mario Malina et al., “What We Know: The Reality, Risks and Response to Climate Change,” AAAS
Climate Science Panel, American Association for the Advancement of Science, 2014, pp. 15–16.
2. “Sarah Palin Rolls Out at Rolling Thunder Motorcycle Ride,” Fox News, May 29, 2011.
3. Martin Weil, “US Airways Plane Gets Stuck in ‘Soft Spot’ on Pavement at Reagan National,”
Washington Post, July 7, 2012; “Why Is My Flight Cancelled?” Imgur, http://imgur.com.
4. Weil, “US Airways Plane Gets Stuck in ‘Soft Spot’ on Pavement at Reagan National.”
5. For important sociological and psychological perspectives on the everyday denial of climate change,
see: Kari Marie Norgaard, Living in Denial: Climate Change, Emotions, and Everyday Life (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 2011); Rosemary Randall, “Loss and Climate Change: The Cost of Parallel

Narratives,” Ecopsychology 1.3 (2009): 118-29; and the essays in Sally Weintrobe, ed., Engaging with
Climate Change (East Sussex: Routledge, 2013).
6. Angélica Navarro Llanos, “Climate Debt: The Basis of a Fair and Effective Solution to Climate
Change,” presentation to Technical Briefing on Historical Responsibility, Ad Hoc Working Group on
Long-term Cooperative Action, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Bonn,
Germany, June 4, 2009.
7. “British PM Warns of Worsening Floods Crisis,” Agence France-Presse, February 11, 2014.
8. “Exponential Growth in Weather Risk Management Contracts,” Weather Risk Management
Association, press release, June 2006; Eric Reguly, “No Climate-Change Deniers to Be Found in the
Reinsurance Business,” Globe and Mail, November 28, 2013.
9. “Investor CDP 2012 Information Request: Raytheon Company,” Carbon Disclosure Project, 2012,
https://www.cdp.net.
10. “Who Will Control the Green Economy?” ETC Group, 2011, p. 23; Chris Glorioso, “Sandy Funds
Went to NJ Town with Little Storm Damage,” NBC News, February 2, 2014.
11. “ ‘Get It Done: Urging Climate Justice, Youth Delegate Anjali Appadurai Mic-Checks UN Summit,”
Democracy Now!, December 9, 2011.
12. Corinne Le Quéré et al., “Global Carbon Budget 2013,” Earth System Science Data 6 (2014): 253;
“Greenhouse Gases Rise by Record Amount,” Associated Press, November 3, 2011.
13. Sally Weintrobe, “The Difficult Problem of Anxiety in Thinking About Climate Change,” in Engaging
with Climate Change, ed. Sally Weintrobe (East Sussex: Routledge, 2013). 43.
14. For critical scholarship on the history and politics of the 2 degree target, see: Joni Seager, “Death By
Degrees: Taking a Feminist Hard Look at the 2 Degrees Climate Policy,” Kvinder, Køn og Foraksning
(Denmark) 18 (2009): 11-22; Christopher Shaw, “Choosing a Dangerous Limit for Climate Change:
An Investigation into How the Decision Making Process Is Constructed in Public Discourses,” PhD
thesis, University of Sussex, 2011, available at http://www.notargets.org.uk; Christopher Shaw,
“Choosing a Dangerous Limit for Climate Change: Public Representations of the Decision Making
Process,” Global Environmental Change 23 (2013): 563-571. COPENHAGEN: Copenhagen Accord,
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, December 18, 2009, p. 1; “DEATH
SENTENCE”: “CJN CMP Agenda Item 5 Intervention,” speech delivered by activist Sylvia Wachira
at Copenhagen climate conference, Climate Justice Now!, December 10, 2009, http://www.climatejustice-now.org; GREENLAND: J. E. Box et al., “Greenland Ice Sheet,” Arctic Report Card 2012,
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, January 14, 2013; ACIDIFICATION: Bärbel
Hönisch et al., “The Geological Record of Ocean Acidification,” Science 335 (2012): 1058-1063;
Adrienne J. Sutton et al., “Natural Variability and Anthropogenic Change in Equatorial Pacific
Surface Ocean pCO2 and pH,” Global Biogeochemical Cycles 28 (2014): 131-145; PERILOUS
IMPACTS: James Hansen et al., “Assessing ‘Dangerous Climate Change’: Required Reduction of
Carbon Emissions to Protect Young People, Future Generations and Nature,” PLOS ONE 8 (2013):
e81648.
15. “Climate Change Report Warns of Dramatically Warmer World This Century,” World Bank, press
release, November 18, 2012.
16. Ibid.; Hans Joachim Schellnhuber et al., “Turn Down the Heat: Why a 4°C Warmer World Must Be
Avoided,” A Report for the World Bank by the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research and
Climate Analytics, November 2012, p. xviii; Kevin Anderson, “Climate Change Going Beyond
Dangerous—Brutal Numbers and Tenuous Hope,” Development Dialogue no. 61, September 2012, p.
29.
17. For general overviews synthesizing scientific research on the likely impacts of a 4 degrees C world, refer
to Schellnhuber et al., “Turn Down the Heat,” as well as the special theme issue entitled “Four Degrees
and Beyond: the Potential for a Global Temperature Increase of Four Degrees and its Implications,”
compiled and edited by Mark G. New et al., Philosophical Transactions of The Royal Society A 369
(2011): 1-241. In 2013, the World Bank released a follow up report exploring the regional impacts of a

4 degree temperature rise, with a focus on Africa and Asia: Hans Joachim Schellnhuber et al., “Turn
Down the Heat: Climate Extremes, Regional Impacts, and the Case for Resilience,” A Report for the
World Bank by the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research and Climate Analytics, June 2013.
Even for the most emissions-intensive scenarios that could lead to 4 degrees of warming, IPCC global
sea level rise projections are lower than those cited here, but many experts regard them as too
conservative. For examples of research informing this passage, see Schellnhuber et al., “Turn Down the
Heat,” p. 29; Anders Levermann et al., “The Multimillennial Sea-Level Commitment of Global
Warming,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110 (2013): 13748; Benjamin P. Horton et
al., “Expert Assessment of Sea-level Rise by AD 2100 and AD 2300,” Quaternary Science Reviews 84
(2014): 1-6. For more information about the vulnerability of small island nations and coastal areas of
Latin America and South and Southeast Asia to sea level rise under “business as usual” and other
emissions scenarios (including more optimistic ones), refer to the Working Group II contributions to
the 4th and 5th Assessment Reports of the IPCC, both available at http://www.ipcc.ch See chapters
10, 13, and 16 of M.L. Perry et al., ed., Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability,
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007); and chapters 24, 27, and 29 of V.R.
Barros et al., ed., Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability, Part B: Regional Aspects,
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014). On California and the northeastern United
States, see Matthew Heberger et al., “Potential Impacts of Increased Coastal Flooding in California
Due to Sea-Level Rise,” Climatic Change 109, Issue 1 Supplement (2011): 229-249; and Asbury H.
Sallenger Jr., Kara S. Doran, and Peter A. Howd, “Hotspot of Accelerated Sea-Level Rise on the
Atlantic Coast of North America,” Nature Climate Change 2 (2012): 884-888. For a recent analysis of
major cities that may be particularly threatened by sea level rise, see: Stephane Hallegatte et al.,
“Future Flood Losses in Major Coastal Cities,” Nature Climate Change 3 (2013): 802-806.
18. For an overview of regional temperature increases associated with a global rise of 4 degrees C or more,
see: M.G. Sanderson, D.L. Hemming and R.A. Betts, “Regional Temperature and Precipitation
Changes Under High-end ( ≥4°C) Global Warming,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A
369 (2011): 85-98. See also: “Climate Stabilization Targets: Emissions, Concentrations, and Impacts
over Decades to Millennia,” Committee on Stabilization Targets for Atmospheric Greenhouse Gas
Concentrations, National Research Council, National Academy of Sciences, 2011, p. 31;
Schellnhuber et al., “Turn Down the Heat,” pp. 37–41. TENS OF THOUSANDS: Jean-Marie Robine
et al., “Death Toll Exceeded 70,000 in Europe During the Summer of 2003,” Comptes Rendus Biologies
331 (2008): 171-78; CROP LOSSES: “Climate Stabilization Targets,” National Academy of Sciences,
pp. 160–63.
19. ICE-FREE ARCTIC: Ibid., pp. 132–36. VEGETATION: Andrew D. Friend et al., “Carbon Residence
Time Dominates Uncertainty in Terrestrial Vegetation Responses to Future Climate and Atmospheric
CO2,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 (2014): 3280; “4 Degree Temperature Rise
Will End Vegetation ‘Carbon Sink,’ ” University of Cambridge, press release, December 17, 2013;
WEST ANTARCTICA STUDY: E. Rignot et al., “Widespread, Rapid Grounding Line Retreat of
Pine Island, Thwaites, Smith, and Kohler Glaciers, West Antarctica, from 1992 to 2011,” Geophysical
Research Letters 41 (2014): 3502–3509; “APPEARS UNSTOPPABLE”: “West Antarctic Glacier Loss
Appears Unstoppable,” Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASA, press release, May 12, 2014; “DISPLACE
MILLIONS” AND STILL TIME: Eric Rignot, “Global Warming: It’s a Point of No Return in West
Antarctica. What Happens Next?” Observer, May 17, 2014.
20. “World Energy Outlook 2011,” International Energy Agency, 2011, p. 40; “World Energy Outlook
2011” (video), Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, November 28, 2011; Timothy M.
Lenton et al., “Tipping Elements in the Earth’s Climate System,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 105 (2008): 1788; “Too Late for Two Degrees?” Low Carbon Economy Index 2012,
PricewaterhouseCoopers, November 2012, p. 1.

21. Lonnie G. Thompson, “Climate Change: The Evidence and Our Options,” The Behavior Analyst 33
(2010): 153.
22. In the U.S., Britain, and Canada, terms for “victory gardens” and “victory bonds” differed between
countries and from World War I to World War II; other terms used included “war gardens” and
“defense bonds,” for example. Ina Zweiniger-Bargielowska, Austerity in Britain: Rationing, Controls, and
Consumption, 1939–1955 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), 54–55; Amy Bentley, Eating for
Victory: Food Rationing and the Politics of Domesticity (Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1998), 138–
39; Franklin D. Roosevelt, “Statement Encouraging Victory Gardens,” April 1, 1944, The American
Presidency Project, http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu.
23. Pablo Solón, “Climate Change: We Need to Guarantee the Right to Not Migrate,” Focus on the
Global South, http://focusweb.org.
24. Glen P. Peters et al., “Rapid Growth in CO2 Emissions After the 2008–2009 Global Financial Crisis,”
Nature Climate Change 2 (2012): 2.
25. Spencer Weart, The Discovery of Global Warming (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008),
149.
26. Corrine Le Quéré et al., “Trends in the Sources and Sinks of Carbon Dioxide,” Nature Geoscience 2
(2009): 831, as cited in Andreas Malm, “China as Chimney of the World: The Fossil Capital
Hypothesis,” Organization & Environment 25 (2012): 146; Glen P. Peters et al., “Rapid Growth in CO2
Emissions After the 2008–2009 Global Financial Crisis,” Nature Climate Change 2 (2012): 2.
27. Kevin Anderson and Alice Bows, “Beyond ‘Dangerous’ Climate Change: Emission Scenarios for a New
World,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A 369 (2011): 35; Kevin Anderson, “EU 2030
Decarbonisation Targets and UK Carbon Budgets: Why So Little Science?” Kevin Anderson.info, June
14, 2013, http://kevinanderson.info.
28. Gro Harlem Brundtland et al., “Environment and Development Challenges: The Imperative to Act,”
joint paper by the Blue Planet Prize laureates, The Asahi Glass Foundation, February 20, 2012, p. 7.
29. “World Energy Outlook 2011,” IEA, p. 40; James Herron, “Energy Agency Warns Governments to
Take Action Against Global Warming,” Wall Street Journal, November 10, 2011.
30. Personal interview with Henry Red Cloud, June 22, 2011.
31. Gary Stix, “Effective World Government Will Be Needed to Stave Off Climate Catastrophe,” Scientific
American, March 17, 2012.
32. Daniel Cusick, “Rapid Climate Changes Turn North Woods into Moose Graveyard,” Scientific
American, May 18, 2012; Jim Robbins, “Moose Die-Off Alarms Scientists,” New York Times, October
14, 2013.
33. Josh Bavas, “About 100,000 Bats Dead After Heatwave in Southern Queensland,” ABC News
(Australia), January 8, 2014.
34. Darryl Fears, “Sea Stars Are Wasting Away in Larger Numbers on a Wider Scale in Two Oceans,”
Washington Post, November 22, 2013; Amanda Stupi, “What We Know—And Don’t Know—About
the Sea Star Die-Off,” KQED, March 7, 2014.

PART I: BAD TIMING
1. William Stanley Jevons, The Coal Question: An Inquiry Concerning the Progress of the Nation, and the
Probable Exhaustion of Our Coal-Mines (London: Macmillan and Co., 1865), viii.
2. Hugo’s original: “C’est une triste chose de songer que la nature parle et que le genre humain n’écoute
pas.” Victor Hugo, Œuvres complètes de Victor Hugo, Vol. 35, ed. Jeanlouis Cornuz (Paris: Éditions
Recontre, 1968), 145.

CHAPTER 1: THE RIGHT IS RIGHT
1. Mario Malina et al., “What We Know: The Reality, Risks and Response to Climate Change,” AAAS
Climate Science Panel, American Association for the Advancement of Science, 2014, p. 3.
2. Thomas J. Donohue, “Managing a Changing Climate: Challenges and Opportunities for the Buckeye
State, Remarks,” speech, Columbus, Ohio, May 1, 2008.
3. Session 4: Public Policy Realities (video), 6th International Conference on Climate Change, The
Heartland Institute, June 30, 2011.
4. Ibid.
5. “Va. Taxpayers Request Records from University of Virginia on Climate Scientist Michael Mann,”
American Tradition Institute, press release, January 6, 2011; Christopher Horner, “ATI Environmental
Law Center Appeals NASA Denial of Request for Dr. James Hansen’s Ethics Disclosures,” American
Tradition Institute, press release, March 16, 2011; Session 4: Public Policy Realities (video), The
Heartland Institute.
6. Obama for America, “Barack Obama’s Plan to Make America a Global Energy Leader,” October 2007;
personal interview with Patrick Michaels, July 1, 2011; Session 5: Sharpening the Scientific Debate
(video), The Heartland Institute; personal interview with Marc Morano, July 1, 2011.
7. Larry Bell, Climate of Corruption: Politics and Power Behind the Global Warming Hoax (Austin: Greenleaf,
2011), xi.
8. Peter T. Doran and Maggie Kendall Zimmerman, “Examining the Scientific Consensus on Climate
Change,” Eos 90, (2009): 22-23; William R. L. Anderegg et al., “Expert Credibility in Climate
Change,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107 (2010): 12107-12109.
9. Keynote Address (video), The Heartland Institute, July 1, 2011; Bob Carter, “There IS a Problem with
Global Warming . . . It Stopped in 1998,” Daily Telegraph, April 9, 2006; Willie Soon and David R.
Legates, “Avoiding Carbon Myopia: Three Considerations for Policy Makers Concerning Manmade
Carbon Dioxide,” Ecology Law Currents 37 (2010): 3; Willie Soon, “It’s the Sun, Stupid!” The
Heartland Institute, March 1, 2009, http://heartland.org; Keynote Address (video), The Heartland
Institute, June 30, 2011.
10. Personal interview with Joseph Bast, June 30, 2011.
11. In the years following the conference, news coverage rebounded to twenty-nine stories in 2012 and
thirty stories in 2013. Douglas Fischer, “Climate Coverage Down Again in 2011,” The Daily Climate,
January 3, 2012; Douglas Fischer, “Climate Coverage Soars in 2013, Spurred by Energy, Weather,” The
Daily Climate, January 2, 2014.
12. Joseph Bast, “Why Won’t Al Gore Debate?” The Heartland Institute, press release, June 27, 2007; Will
Lester, “Vietnam Veterans to Air Anti-Kerry Ads in W. Va.,” Associated Press, August 4, 2004; Leslie
Kaufman, “Dissenter on Warming Expands His Campaign,” New York Times, April 9, 2009; John H.
Richardson, “This Man Wants to Convince You Global Warming Is a Hoax,” Esquire, March 30, 2010;
Session 4: Public Policy Realities (video), The Heartland Institute.
13. “Big Drop in Those Who Believe That Global Warming Is Coming,” Harris Interactive, press release,
December 2, 2009; “Most Americans Think Devastating Natural Disasters Are Increasing,” Harris
Interactive, press release, July 7, 2011; personal interview with Scott Keeter, September 12, 2011.
14. Lydia Saad, “A Steady 57% in U.S. Blame Humans for Global Warming,” Gallup Politics, March 18,
2014; “October 2013 Political Survey: Final Topline,” Pew Research Center for the People & the
Press, October 9–13, 2013, p. 1; personal email communication with Riley Dunlap, March 29, 2014.
15. DEMOCRATS AND LIBERALS: Aaron M. McCright and Riley E. Dunlap, “The Politicization of
Climate Change and Polarization in the American Public’s Views of Global Warming 2001–2010,”
The Sociological Quarterly 52 (2011): 188, 193; Saad, “A Steady 57% in U.S. Blame Humans for Global

Warming”; REPUBLICANS: Anthony Leiserowitz et al., “Politics and Global Warming: Democrats,
Republicans, Independents, and the Tea Party,” Yale Project on Climate Change Communication and
George Mason University Center for Climate Change Communication, 2011, pp. 3–4; 20 PERCENT:
Lawrence C. Hamilton, “Climate Change: Partisanship, Understanding, and Public Opinion,” Carsey
Institute, Spring 2011, p. 4; OCTOBER 2013 POLL: “Focus Canada 2013: Canadian Public Opinion
About
Climate
Change,”
The
Environics
Institute,
November
18,
2013,
http://www.environicsinstitute.org; AUSTRALIA, U.K., AND WESTERN EUROPE: Bruce Tranter,
“Political Divisions over Climate Change and Environmental Issues in Australia,” Environmental
Politics 20 (2011): 78-96; Ben Clements, “Exploring public opinion on the issue of climate change in
Britain,” British Politics 7 (2012): 183-202; Aaron M. McCright, Riley E. Dunlap, and Sandra T.
Marquart-Pyatt, “Climate Change and Political Ideology in the European Union,” Michigan State
University, working paper, 2014.
16. For a broad, accessible overview of the study of right-wing science denial, see Chris Mooney, The
Republican Brain: The Science of Why They Deny Science—and Reality (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley &
Sons, 2012). CULTURAL WORLDVIEW: Dan M. Kahan et al., “The Second National Risk and
Culture Study: Making Sense of—and Making Progress in—the American Culture War of Fact,” The
Cultural Cognition Project at Yale Law School, September 27, 2007, p. 4, available at
http://www.culturalcognition.net.
17. Dan Kahan, “Cultural Cognition as a Conception of the Cultural Theory of Risk,” in Handbook of Risk
Theory: Epistemology, Decision Theory, Ethics, and Social Implications of Risk, ed. Sabine Roeser et al.
(London: Springer, 2012), 731.
18. Kahan et al., “The Second National Risk and Culture Study,” p. 4.
19. Dan Kahan, “Fixing the Communications Failure,” Nature 463 (2010): 296; Dan Kahan et al., “Book
Review—Fear of Democracy: A Cultural Evaluation of Sunstein on Risk,” Harvard Law Review 119
(2006): 1083.
20. Kahan, “Fixing the Communications Failure,” 296.
21. Rebecca Rifkin, “Climate Change Not a Top Worry in U.S.,” Gallup, March 12, 2014; “Deficit
Reduction Declines as Policy Priority,” Pew Research Center for the People & the Press, January 27,
2014; “Thirteen Years of the Public’s Top Priorities,” Pew Research Center for the People & the Press,
January 27, 2014, http://www.people-press.org.
22. Heather Gass, “EBTP at the One Bay Area Agenda 21 Meeting,” East Bay Tea Party, May 7, 2011,
http://www.theeastbayteaparty.com.
23. For more on the conservative movement’s role in climate change denial, see: Riley E. Dunlap and
Aaron M. McCright, “Organized Climate Change Denial,” in The Oxford Handbook of Climate Change
and Society, ed. John S. Dryzek, Richard B. Norgaard, and David Schlosberg (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2011), 144–160; and Aaron M. McCright and Riley E. Dunlap, “Anti-Reflexivity:
The American Conservative Movement’s Success in Undermining Climate Science and Policy,”
Theory, Culture, and Society 27 (2010): 100–133. DENIAL BOOKS STUDY: Riley E. Dunlap and
Peter J. Jacques, “Climate Change Denial Books and Conservative Think Tanks: Exploring the
Connection,” American Behavioral Scientist 57 (2013): 705–706.
24. Bast interview, June 30, 2011.
25. Robert Manne, “How Can Climate Change Denialism Be Explained?” The Monthly, December 8, 2011.
26. GORE: “Al Gore Increases His Carbon Footprint, Buys House in Ritzy Santa Barbara Neighborhood,”
Hate the Media! May 2, 2010; HANSEN: William Lajeunesse, “NASA Scientist Accused of Using
Celeb Status Among Environmental Groups to Enrich Himself,” Fox News, June 22, 2011;
Christopher Horner, “A Brief Summary of James E. Hansen’s NASA Ethics File,” American Tradition
Institute, November 18, 2011; VINDICATED: David Adam, “ ‘Climategate’ Review Clears Scientists
of Dishonesty over Data,” Guardian, July 7, 2010; FUELED: James Delingpole, “Climategate: The Final
Nail in the Coffin of ‘Anthropogenic Global Warming’?” Daily Telegraph, November 20, 2009; James
Delingpole, “Climategate: FOIA—The Man Who Saved the World,” Daily Telegraph, March 13, 2013;

BILLBOARD CAMPAIGN: Wendy Koch, “Climate Wars Heat Up with Pulled Unabomber
Billboards,” USA Today, May 4, 2012.
27. Personal interview with James Delingpole, July 1, 2011; Bast interview, June 30, 2011.
28. Bast interview, July 1, 2011.
29. “The Rt Hon. Lord Lawson of Blaby,” Celebrity Speakers, http://www.speakers.co.uk; Nigel Lawson,
The View from No. 11: Britain’s Longest-Serving Cabinet Member Recalls the Triumphs and
Disappointments of the Thatcher Era (New York: Doubleday, 1993), 152–62, 237–40; Tim Rayment and
David Smith, “Should High Earners Pay Less Tax,” The Times (London), September 11, 2011; Nigel
Lawson, An Appeal to Reason: A Cool Look at Global Warming (New York: Duckworth Overlook,
2008), 101.
30. Naomi Oreskes and Erik M. Conway, Merchants of Doubt (New York: Bloomsbury, 2010), 5, 25–26, 82,
135,164; Václav Klaus, “The Climate Change Doctrine Is Part of Environmentalism, Not of Science,”
Inaugural Annual GWPF Lecture, October 19, 2010, http://www.thegwpf.org.
31. Robert J. Brulle, “Institutionalizing Delay: Foundation Funding and the Creation of U.S. Climate
Change Counter-Movement Organizations,” Climatic Change 122 (2014): 681.
32. In addition to questioning whether the concept of “worldview” is truly distinct from political ideology
and possesses unique explanatory power, social scientists have criticized cultural cognition theory for
neglecting the structural drivers of the climate change denial movement. For key examples of
scholarship focusing on the social, political, and economic dynamics of that movement, see Dunlap
and McCright, “Organized Climate Change Denial,” and McCright and Dunlap, “Anti-Reflexivity.”
On the Heartland Institute’s funding: according to Greenpeace USA’s ExxonSecrets project, the
organization “has received $676,500 from ExxonMobil since 1998”; according to Heartland itself, it
received a total of $100,000 from the Sarah Scaife Foundation in 1992 and 1993 and $50,000 from the
Charles G. Koch Charitable Foundation in 1994; and according to the Conservative Transparency
database maintained by the American Bridge 21st Century Foundation, Heartland received an
additional total of $42,578 from the Charles G. Koch Charitable Foundation between 1986 and 1989
and in 2011, an additional total of $225,000 from the Sarah Scaife Foundation between 1988 and
1991 and in 1995, a total of $40,000 from the Claude R. Lambe Charitable Foundation (connected to
the Koch family) between 1992 and 1999, and a total of $10,000 from The Carthage Foundation (a
Scaife foundation) in 1986. See: “Factsheet: Heartland Institute,” ExxonSecrets.org, Greenpeace
USA, http://www.exxonsecrets.org; Joseph L. Bast, “A Heartland Letter to People for the American
Way,” The Heartland Institute, August 20, 1996, http://heartland.org; “Heartland Institute,”
Conservative Transparency, Bridge Project, American Bridge 21st Century Foundation,
http://conservativetransparency.org. “MERITS OF OUR POSITIONS”: “Reply to Our Critics,” The
Heartland Institute, http://heartland.org/reply-to-critics; LEAKED DOCUMENTS: “2012 Fundraising
Plan,” The Heartland Institute, January 15, 2012, pp. 20–21.
33. “Money Troubles: How to Kick-Start the Economy,” Fareed Zakaria GPS, CNN, August 15, 2010;
“Factsheet: Cato Institute,” ExxonSecrets.org, Greenpeace USA, http://www.exxonsecrets.org; “Koch
Industries Climate Denial Front Group: Cato Institute,” Greenpeace USA, http://www.greenpeace.org;
“Case Study: Dr. Willie Soon, a Career Fueled by Big Oil and Coal,” Greenpeace USA, June 28, 2011,
http://www.greenpeace.org.
34. “Factsheet: Committee for a Constructive Tomorrow,” ExxonSecrets.org, Greenpeace USA,
http://www.exxonsecrets.org; Suzanne Goldenberg, “Secret Funding Helped Build Vast Network of
Climate Denial Thinktanks,” Guardian, February 14, 2013.
35. Lawrence C. Hamilton, “Climate Change: Partisanship, Understanding, and Public Opinion,” Carsey
Institute, Spring 2011, p. 4; “Vast Majority Agree Climate Is Changing,” Forum Research, July 24,
2013, p. 1, http://www.forumresearch.com.
36. Doran and Zimmerman, “Examining the Scientific Consensus on Climate Change,” 23; Upton
Sinclair, I, Candidate for Governor: And How I Got Licked (Berkeley: University of California Press,
1994), 109.

37. Personal email communication with Aaron McCright, September 30, 2011; Aaron McCright and Riley
Dunlap, “Cool Dudes: The Denial of Climate Change Among Conservative White Males in the
United States,” Global Environmental Change 21 (2011): 1167, 1171.
38. Session 5: Sharpening the Scientific Debate (video), The Heartland Institute; Chris Hooks, “State
Climatologist: Drought Officially Worst on Record,” Texas Tribune, April 4, 2011; Keynote Address
(video), The Heartland Institute, July 1, 2011; “France Heat Wave Death Toll Set at 14,802,”
Associated Press, September 25, 2003; Keynote Address (video), The Heartland Institute, June 30,
2011.
39. “World Bank Boosts Aid for Horn of Africa Famine,” Agence France-Presse, September 24, 2011;
“Mankind Always Adapts to Climate, Rep. Barton Says,” Republicans on the House and Energy
Commerce Committee, press release, March 25, 2009, http://republicans.energycom merce.house.gov.
40. “Turn Down the Heat: Why a 4°C Warmer World Must Be Avoided,” Potsdam Institute for Climate
Impact Research and Climate Analytics, World Bank, November 2012, p. ix; personal interview with
Patrick Michaels, July 1, 2011.
41. “Petition of the Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America for EPA to Conduct Its
Endangerment Finding Proceeding on the Record Using Administrative Procedure Act §§ 556 and
557,” Attachment 1, “Detailed Review of the Health and Welfare Science Evidence and IQA Petition
for Correction,” U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 2009, p. 4.
42. Christian Parenti, Tropic of Chaos: Climate Change and the New Geography of Violence (New York:
Nation Books, 2011).
43. Bryan Walsh, “The Costs of Climate Change and Extreme Weather Are Passing the High-Water
Mark,” Time, July 17, 2013; Suzanne Goldenberg, “Starbucks Concerned World Coffee Supply Is
Threatened by Climate Change,” Guardian, October 13, 2011; Emily Atkin, “Chipotle Warns It Might
Stop Serving Guacamole If Climate Change Gets Worse,” Climate Progress, March 4, 2014; Robert
Kopp et al., “American Climate Prospectus: Economic Risks in the United States,” prepared by
Rhodium Group for the Risky Business Project, June 2014.
44. “Insurer Climate Risk Disclosure Survey,” Ceres, March 2013, p. 53, http://www.ceres.org; Eduardo
Porter, “For Insurers, No Doubts on Climate Change,” New York Times, May 14, 2013; “2012
Fundrasing Plan,” The Heartland Institute, January 15, 2012, pp. 24–25.
45. Joseph Bast, “About the Center on Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate at the Heartland Institute,”
Policy Documents, The Heartland Institute, June 5, 2012; personal interview with Eli Lehrer, August
20, 2012.
46. Lehrer interview, August 20, 2012.
47. Ibid.
48. John R. Porter et al., “Food Security and Food Production Systems,” in Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability, Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects, Contribution of Working Group II to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. C.B Field et al.
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014), 20-21; Joan Nymand Larsen et al., “Polar Regions,”
in Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability, Part B: Regional Aspects, Contribution of
Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ed.
V.R. Barros et al. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014), 20; Julie Satow, “The Generator Is
the Machine of the Moment,” New York Times, January 11, 2013.
49. William Alden, “Around Goldman’s Headquarters, an Oasis of Electricity,” New York Times, November
2, 2012; “How FedEx Survived Hurricane Sandy,” KLTV, October 31, 2012; Kimi Yoshino, “Another
Way the Rich Are Different: ‘Concierge-Level’ Fire Protection,” Los Angeles Times, October 26, 2007;
P. Solomon Banda, “Insurance Companies Send Crews to Protect Homes,” Associated Press, July 5,
2012.
50. Jim Geraghty, “Climate Change Offers Us an Opportunity,” Philadelphia Inquirer, August 28, 2011;
FOOTNOTE: “House Bill No. 459,” 2011 Montana Legislature, February 15, 2011; Brad Johnson,

“Wonk Room Interviews Montana Legislator Who Introduced Bill to Declare Global Warming
‘Natural,’ ” ThinkProgress Green, February 17, 2011.
51. FOOTNOTE: “Mission Statement,” American Freedom Alliance, http://www.americanfreedom
alliance.org; Chris Skates, Going Green: For Some It Has Nothing to Do with the Environment (Alachua,
FL: Bridge-Logos, 2011).
52. Kurt M. Campbell, Jay Gulledge, J. R. McNeill, et al., “The Age of Consequences: The Foreign Policy
National Security Implications of Global Climate Change,” Center for Strategic and International
Studies and Center for a New American Security, November 2007, p. 85.
53. Lee Fang, “David Koch Now Taking Aim at Hurricane Sandy Victims,” The Nation, December 22,
2012.
54. “230,000 Join Mail Call to Use Some of the UK’s £11billion Foreign Aid Budget to Tackle Floods
Crisis,” Daily Mail, February 14, 2014.
55. Joe Romm, “Krauthammer, Part 2: The Real Reason Conservatives Don’t Believe in Climate Science,”
Climate Progress, June 1, 2008.
56. Spencer Weart, The Discovery of Global Warming (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008),
149.
57. Global Carbon Project emissions data, 2013 Budget v2.4 (July 2014), available at http://cdiac.ornl.gov.
58. Ibid.; Michael Mann interview, The Big Picture with Thom Hartmann, RT America, March 25, 2014;
Kevin Anderson, “Why Carbon Prices Can’t Deliver the 2°C Target,” KevinAnderson.info, August
13, 2013, http://kevinanderson.info.
59. Kahan et al., “The Second National Risk and Culture Study,” pp. 5-6.
60. Robert Jay Lifton and Richard Falk, Indefensible Weapons: The Political and Psychological Case Against
Nuclearism (New York: Basic Books, 1982).
61. Dan Kahan et al., “The Tragedy of the Risk-Perception Commons: Culture Conflict, Rationality
Conflict, and Climate Change,” Cultural Cognition Project Working Paper No. 89, 2011, pp. 15-16,
available at http://culturalcognition.net; Umair Irfan, “Report Finds ‘Motivated Avoidance’ Plays a
Role in Climate Change Politics,” ClimateWire, December 19, 2011; Irina Feygina, John T. Jost, and
Rachel E. Goldsmith, “System Justification, the Denial of Global Warming, and the Possibility of
‘System-Sanctioned Change,’ ” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 36, (2010): 336.
62. Ted Nordhaus and Michael Shellenberger, “The Long Death of Environmentalism,” Breakthrough
Institute, February 25, 2011; Michael Shellenberger and Ted Nordhaus, “Evolve,” Orion,
September/October 2011.
63. Scott Condon, “Expert: Win Climate Change Debate by Easing off Science,” Glenwood Springs Post
Independent, July 29, 2010.
64. For an example of how psychologists interested in generational differences have analyzed data from
“The American Freshman” survey run out of the University of California, Los Angeles, see: Jean M.
Twenge, Elise C. Freeman, and W. Keith Campbell, “Generational Differences in Young Adults’ Life
Goals, Concern for Others, and Civic Orientation, 1966–2009,” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 102 (2012): 1045-1062. Alternative explanations such as the rising cost of education (itself
a product of the neoliberal era) could help explain the shift in materialist attitudes. For the 1966 and
2013 survey data, see: Alexander W. Astin, Robert J. Panos, and John A. Creager, “National Norms
for Entering College Freshmen—Fall 1966,” Ace Research Reports, Vol. 2, No. 7, 1967, p. 21; Kevin
Eagan et al., “The American Freshman: National Norms Fall 2013,” Cooperative Institutional
Research Program at the Higher Education Research Institute, University of California, Los Angeles,
2013, p. 40. THATCHER QUOTE: Ronald Butt, “Mrs Thatcher: The First Two Years,” Sunday Times
(London), May 3, 1981.
65. John Immerwahr, “Waiting for a Signal: Public Attitudes Toward Global Warming, the Environment,
and Geophysical Research,” Public Agenda, American Geophysical Union, April 15, 1999, pp. 4–5.
66. Yuko Heath and Robert Gifford, “Free-Market Ideology and Environmental Degradation: The Case of
Belief in Global Climate Change,” Environment and Behavior 38 (2006): 48–71; Tim Kasser, “Values

and Ecological Sustainability: Recent Research and Policy Possibilities,” in The Coming
Transformation: Values to Sustain Human and Natural Communities, eds. Stephen R. Kellert and James
Gustave Speth, Yale School of Forestry & Environmental Studies, 2009, pp. 180–204; Tim Crompton
and Tim Kasser, Meeting Environmental Challenges: The Role of Human Identity (Surrey: WWF-UK,
2009), 10.
67. Milton Friedman and Rose D. Friedman, Two Lucky People: Memoirs (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1998), 594.
68. Rebecca Solnit, A Paradise Built in Hell: The Extraordinary Communities That Arise in Disaster (New
York: Penguin Books, [2009] 2010).
CHAPTER 2: HOT MONEY
1. Ken Burns, The Dust Bowl, PBS, 2012.
2. Marlene Moses, “The Choice Is Ours,” Planet B, Rio + 20 Special Edition, June 2012, p. 80.
3. US CHALLENGE TO CHINA: “China—Measures Concerning Wind Power Equipment,” Request for
Consultations by the United States, World Trade Organization, December 22, 2010, p. 1; CHINA
CHALLENGE TO EU: “European Member States—Certain Measures Affecting the Renewable Energy
Generation Sector,” Request for Consultations by China, World Trade Organization, November 7,
2012, p. 1; CHINA THREATENS US: “Announcement No. 26 of 2012 of the Ministry of Commerce
of the People’s Republic of China on the Preliminary Investigation Conclusion on the U.S. Policy
Support and Subsidies for Its Renewable Energy Sector,” Ministry of Commerce, People’s Republic of
China, May 27, 2012, http://english.mof com.gov; US CHALLENGE TO INDIA: “India—Certain
Measures Relating to Solar Cells and Solar Modules,” Request for Consultations by the United States,
World Trade Organization, February 11, 2013, pp. 1–2; CONTEMPLATING CLOSURE: Chandra
Bhushan, “Who Is the One Not Playing by the Rules—India or the US?” Centre for Science and
Environment, February 8, 2013; personal interview with Chandra Bhushan, Deputy Director General,
Centre for Science and Environment, May 10, 2013; INDIA RESPONSE: “Certain Local Content
Requirements in Some of the Renewable Energy Sector Programs,” Questions by India to the United
States, World Trade Organization, April 17, 2013, p. 1; “Subsidies,” Questions Posed by India to the
United States Under Article 25.8 of the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures—State
Level Renewable Energy Sector Subsidy Programmes with Local Content Requirements, World Trade
Organization, April 18, 2013.
4. Personal interview with Paolo Maccario, January 9, 2014.
5. Green Energy and Green Economy Act, 2009, S.O. 2009, c.12—Bill 150, Government of Ontario,
2009.
6. Jenny Yuen, “Gore Green with Envy,” Toronto Star, November 25, 2009; “International Support for
Ontario’s Green Energy Act,” Government of Ontario, Ministry of Energy, June 24, 2009.
7. “Feed-in Tariff Program: FIT Rules Version 1.1,” Ontario Power Authority, September 30, 2009, p. 14.
8. Michael A. Levi, “The Canadian Oil Sands: Energy Security vs. Climate Change,” Council on Foreign
Relations, 2009, p. 12; Gary Rabbior, “Why the Canadian Dollar Has Been Bouncing Higher,” Globe
and Mail, October 30, 2009.
9. GAS: Mississauga Power Plant Cancellation Costs, Special Report, Office of the Auditor General of
Ontario, April 2013, pp. 7–8; Oakville Power Plant Cancellation Costs, Special Report, Office of the
Auditor General of Ontario, October 2013, pp. 7–8; WIND: Dave Seglins, “Ont. Couple Seeks
Injunction to Stop Wind-Farm Expansion,” CBC News, September 11, 2012; SOLAR: “Ontario Brings
More Clean Solar Power Online, Creates Jobs,” Government of Ontario, Ministry of Energy, press
release, July 31, 2012; ONE COAL PLANT: “Ontario—First Place in North America to End CoalFired Power,” Government of Ontario, Office of the Premier, November 21, 2013; JOBS: “Progress
Report 2014: Jobs and Economy,” Government of Ontario, May 1, 2014, http://www.ontario.ca.
10. “Wayne Wright, Silfab Solar” (video), BlueGreen Canada, YouTube, June 2, 2011.

11. “Canada—Certain Measures Affecting the Renewable Energy Generation Sector,” Request for
Consultations by Japan, World Trade Organization, September 16, 2010, pp. 2–3.
12. “Canada—Certain Measures Affecting the Renewable Energy Generation Sector; Canada—Measures
Relating to the Feed-in Tariff Program,” Reports of the Appellate Body, World Trade Organization,
May 6, 2013; “Ontario to Change Green Energy Law After WTO Ruling,” Canadian Press, May 29,
2013; “Ontario Lowering Future Energy Costs,” Government of Ontario, Ministry of Energy, press
release, December 11, 2013.
13. Elizabeth Bast et al., “Low Hanging Fruit: Fossil Fuel Subsidies, Climate Finance, and Sustainable
Development,” Oil Change International for the Heinrich Böll Stiftung North America, June 2012, p.
16; Nicholas Stern, The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, [2006] 2007), xviii.
14. “Facts About Wind Power: Facts and Numbers,” Danish Energy Agency, http://www.ens.dk;
“Renewables Now Cover More than 40% of Electricity Consumption,” Danish Energy Agency, press
release, September 24, 2012; Greg Pahl, The Citizen-Powered Energy Handbook: Community Solutions to
a Global Crisis (White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green, 2007), 69; Shruti Shukla and Steve Sawyer
(Global Wind Energy Council), 30 Years of Policies for Wind Energy: Lessons from 12 Wind Energy
Markets (Abu Dhabi, UAE: International Renewable Energy Agency, 2012), 55.
15. Scott Sinclair, “Negotiating from Weakness,” Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives, April 2010, p.
11.
16. Aaron Cosbey, “Renewable Energy Subsidies and the WTO: The Wrong Law and the Wrong Venue,”
Subsidy Watch 44 (2011): 1.
17. “Multi-Association Letter Regarding EU Fuel Quality Directive,” Institute for 21st Century Energy,
May 20, 2013, http://www.energyxxi.org; “Froman Pledges to Preserve Jones Act, Criticizes EU Clean
Fuel Directive,” Inside US Trade, September 20, 2013; “Non-paper on a Chapter on Energy and Raw
Materials in TTIP,” Council of the European Union, May 27, 2014, http://www.scribd.com; Lydia
DePillis, “A Leaked Document Shows Just How Much the EU Wants a Piece of America’s Fracking
Boom,” Washington Post, July 8, 2014.
18. The quote is from an interview conducted by Victor Menotti, executive director of the International
Forum on Globalization, in 2005. Victor Menotti, “G8 ‘Climate Deal’ Ducks Looming Clash with
WTO,” International Forum on Globalization, July 2007, http://www.ifg.org.
19. “Notice of Arbitration Under the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law and Chapter Eleven of the North American Free Trade Agreement,” Lone
Pine Resources, September 6, 2013.
20. “U.S. Solar Market Insight Report: 2013 Year-in-Review,” Executive Summary, GTM Research, Solar
Energy Industries Association, p. 4; Bhushan, “Who Is the One Not Playing by the Rules—India or the
US?”; Bhushan interview, May 10, 2013; Maccario interview, January 9, 2014; “Climate Change,
China, and the WTO,” March 30, 2011 (video), panel discussion, Columbia Law School.
21. Personal interview with Steven Shrybman, October 4, 2011.
22. Oceanographer Roger Revelle, who led the team that wrote on atmospheric CO2 in the report for
President Johnson, had used similar language describing carbon emissions as a “geophysical
experiment” as early as 1957, in a landmark climate science paper co-authored with chemist Hans
Suess: Roger Revelle and Hans E. Suess, “Carbon Dioxide Exchange Between Atmosphere and Ocean
and the Question of an Increase of Atmospheric CO2 during the Past Decades,” Tellus 9 (1957): 19–
20. For in-depth histories of climate science and politics, see: Spencer Weart, The Discovery of Global
Warming (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008); Joshua P. Howe, Behind the Curve: Science
and the Politics of Global Warming (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2014). HISTORY: Weart,
The Discovery of Global Warming, 1–37; JOHNSON REPORT: Roger Revelle et al., “Atmospheric
Carbon Dioxide,” in Restoring the Quality of Our Environment, Report of the Environmental Pollution
Panel, President’s Science Advisory Committee, The White House, November 1965, Appendix Y4,
pp. 126–27.

23. “Statement of Dr. James Hansen, Director, NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies,” presented to
United States Senate, June 23, 1988; Philip Shabecoff, “Global Warming Has Begun, Expert Tells
Senate,” New York Times, June 24, 1988; Weart, The Discovery of Global Warming, 150–51.
24. Thomas Sancton, “Planet of the Year: What on EARTH Are We Doing?,” Time, January 2, 1989.
25. Ibid.
26. President R. Venkataraman, “Towards a Greener World,” speech at WWF-India, New Delhi,
November 3, 1989, in Selected Speeches, Volume I: July 1987–December 1989 (New Delhi: Government
of India, 1991), 612.
27. Daniel Indiviglio, “How Americans’ Love Affair with Debt Has Grown,” The Atlantic, September 26,
2010.
28. One bold proposal imagines future restrictions on trade in all goods produced with fossil fuels, arguing
that once the green transition is underway and industries have begun to decarbonize, such measures
could be introduced and ramped up gradually: Tilman Santarius, “Climate and Trade: Why Climate
Change Calls for Fundamental Reforms in World Trade Policies,” German NGO Forum on
Environment and Development, Heinrich Böll Foundation, pp. 21–23. U.N. CLIMATE
AGREEMENT: United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, United Nations, 1992,
Article 3, Principle 5; “PIVOTAL MOMENT”: Robyn Eckersley, “Understanding the Interplay
Between the Climate and Trade Regimes,” in Climate and Trade Policies in a Post-2012 World, United
Nations Environment Programme, p. 17.
29. Martin Khor, “Disappointment and Hope as Rio Summit Ends,” in Earth Summit Briefings (Penang:
Third World Network, 1992), p. 83.
30. Steven Shrybman, “Trade, Agriculture, and Climate Change: How Agricultural Trade Policies Fuel
Climate Change,” Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy, November 2000, p. 1.
31. Sonja J. Vermeulen, Bruce M. Campbell, and John S.I. Ingram, “Climate Change and Food Systems,”
Annual Review of Environment 37 (2012): 195; personal email communication with Steven Shrybman,
April 23, 2014.
32. “Secret Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement (TPP)—Environment Consolidated Text,” WikiLeaks,
January 15, 2014, https://wikileaks.org; “Summary of U.S. Counterproposal to Consolidated Text of
the Environment Chapter,” released by RedGE, February 17, 2014, http://www .redge.org.pe.
33. Traffic refers to containerized port traffic, measured by twenty-foot equivalent units (TEUs). From 1994
to 2013 global containerized port traffic increased from 128,320,326 to an estimated 627,930,960
TEUs, an increase of 389.4 percent: United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, “Review
of Maritime Transport,” various years, available at http://unctad.org. For years 2012 and 2013, port
traffic was projected based on industry estimates from Drewry: “Container Market Annual Review and
Forecast 2013/14,” Drewry, October 2013. NOT ATTRIBUTED: “Emissions from Fuel Used for
International Aviation and Maritime Transport (International Bunker Fuels),” United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, http://unfccc.int; SHIPPING EMMISSIONS: Øyvind
Buhaug et al., “Second IMO GHG Study 2009,” International Maritime Organization, 2009, p. 1.
34. “European Union CO2 Emissions: Different Accounting Perspectives,” European Environmental
Agency Technical Report No. 20/2013, 2013, pp. 7–8.
35. Glen P. Peters et al., “Growth in Emission Transfers via International Trade from 1990 to 2008,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 (2011): 8903-4.
36. Corrine Le Quéré et al., “Global Budget 2013,” Earth System Science Data 6 (2014): 252; Corrine Le
Quéré et al., “Trends in the Sources and Sinks of Carbon Dioxide,” Nature Geoscience 2 (2009): 831;
Ross Garnaut et al., “Emissions in the Platinum Age: The Implications of Rapid Development for
Climate-Change Mitigation,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 24 (2008): 392; Glen P. Peters et al.,
“Rapid Growth in CO2 Emissions After the 2008–2009 Global Financial Crisis,” Nature Climate
Change 2 (2012): 2; “Technical Summary,” in O. Edenhofer et al., ed., Climate Change 2014: Mitigation
of Climate Change, Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), 15.

37. Andreas Malm, “China as Chimney of the World: The Fossil Capital Hypothesis,” Organization &
Environment 25 (2012): 146, 165; Yan Yunfeng and Yang Laike, “China’s Foreign Trade and Climate
Change: A Case Study of CO2 Emissions,” Energy Policy 38 (2010): 351; Ming Xu et al., “CO2
Emissions Embodied in China’s Exports from 2002 to 2008: A Structural Decomposition Analysis,”
Energy Policy 39 (2011): 7383.
38. Personal interview with Margrete Strand Rangnes, March 18, 2013.
39. Malm, “China as Chimney of the World,” 147, 162.
40. Elisabeth Rosenthal, “Europe Turns Back to Coal, Raising Climate Fears,” New York Times, April 23,
2008; Personal email communication with IEA Clean Coal Centre, March 19, 2014.
41. Jonathan Watts, “Foxconn offers pay rises and suicide nets as fears grow over wave of deaths,” Guardian,
May 28, 2010; Shahnaz Parveen, “Rana Plaza factory collapse survivors struggle one year on,” BBC
News, April 23, 2014.
42. Mark Dowie, Losing Ground: American Environmentalism at the Close of the Twentieth Century
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996), 185-86; Keith Schneider, “Environment Groups Are Split on
Support for Free-Trade Pact,” New York Times, September 16, 1993.
43. Dowie, Losing Ground, 186–87; Gilbert A. Lewthwaite, “Gephardt Declares Against NAFTA;
Democrat Cites Threat to U.S. Jobs,” Baltimore Sun, September 22, 1993; John Dillin, “NAFTA
Opponents Dig In Despite Lobbying Effort,” Christian Science Monitor, October 12, 1993; Mark Dowie,
“The Selling (Out) of the Greens; Friends of Earth–or Bill?” The Nation, April 18, 1994.
44. Bill Clinton, “Remarks on the Signing of NAFTA (December 8, 1993),” Miller Center, University of
Virginia.
45. Stan Cox, “Does It Really Matter Whether Your Food Was Produced Locally?” Alternet, February 19,
2010.
46. Solomon interview, August 27, 2013.
47. Kevin Anderson, “Climate Change Going Beyond Dangerous—Brutal Numbers and Tenuous Hope,”
Development Dialogue no. 61, September 2012, pp. 16-40.
48. The “8 to 10 percent” range relies on interviews with Anderson and Bows-Larkin as well as their
published work. For the underlying emissions scenarios, refer to pathways C+1, C+3, C+5, and B6 3
in: Kevin Anderson and Alice Bows, “Beyond ‘Dangerous’ Climate Change: Emission Scenarios for a
New World,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A 369 (2011): 35. See also: Kevin
Anderson, “EU 2030 Decarbonisation Targets and UK Carbon Budgets: Why So Little Science?”
KevinAnderson.info, June 14, 2013, http://kevinanderson.info. HUGELY DAMAGING: Anderson,
“Climate Change Going Beyond Dangerous,” pp. 18–21; DE BOER: Alex Morales, “Kyoto Veterans
Say Global Warming Goal Slipping Away,” Bloomberg, November 4, 2013.
49. Stern, The Economics of Climate Change, 231–32.
50. Ibid., 231; Global Carbon Project emissions data, 2013 Budget v2.4 (July 2014), available at
http://cdiac.ornl.gov; Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center emissions data, available at
http://cdiac.ornl.gov.
51. Kevin Anderson and Alice Bows, “A 2°C Target? Get Real, Because 4°C Is on Its Way,” Parliamentary
Brief 13 (2010): 19; FOOTNOTE: Anderson and Bows, “Beyond ‘Dangerous’ Climate Change,” 35;
Kevin Anderson, “Avoiding Dangerous Climate Change Demands De-growth Strategies from
Wealthier Nations,” KevinAnderson.info, November 25, 2013, http://kevinanderson.info.
52. Anderson and Bows-Larkin have based their analysis on the commitment made by governments at the
2009 U.N. climate summit in Copenhagen that emission cuts should be done on the basis “of equity”
(meaning rich countries must lead so that poor countries have room to develop). Some argue that rich
countries don’t have to cut quite so much. Even if that were true, however, the basic global picture still
suggests that the necessary reductions are incompatible with economic growth as we have known it. As
Tim Jackson shows in Prosperity Without Growth, global annual emission cuts of as little as 4.9 percent
cannot be achieved simply with green tech and greater efficiencies. Indeed he writes that to meet that
target, with the world population and income per capita continuing to grow at current rates, the

carbon intensity of economic activity would need to go down “almost ten times faster than it is doing
right now.” And by 2050, we would need to be twenty-one times more efficient than we are today. So,
even if Anderson and Bows-Larkin have vastly overshot, they are still right on their fundamental
point: we need to change our current model of growth. See: Tim Jackson, Prosperity Without Growth:
Economics for a Finite Planet (London: Earthscan, 2009): 80, 86.
53. Anderson and Bows, “A New Paradigm for Climate Change,” 640.
54. Kevin Anderson, “Romm Misunderstands Klein’s and My View of Climate Change and Economic
Growth,” KevinAnderson.info, September 24, 2013.
55. Clive Hamilton, “What History Can Teach Us About Climate Change Denial,” in Engaging with
Climate Change: Psychoanalytic and Interdisciplinary Perspectives, ed. Sally Weintrobe (East Sussex:
Routledge, 2013), 18.
56. For the foundational scenario modeling work on a “Great Transition” to global sustainability, led by
researchers at the Tellus Institute and the Stockholm Environment Institute, see: Paul Raskin et al.,
“Great Transition: The Promise and Lure of the Times Ahead,” Report of the Global Scenario Group,
Stockholm Environment Institute and Tellus Institute, 2002. This research has continued as part of
Tellus’ Great Transition Initiative, available at: “Great Transition Initiative: Toward a Transformative
Vision and Praxis,” Tellus Institute, http://www.greattransition.org. For parallel work at the U.K.’s
New Economics Foundation, see: Stephen Spratt, Andrew Simms, Eva Neitzert, and Josh RyanCollins, “The Great Transition,” The New Economics Foundation, June 2010.
57. Bows interview, January 14, 2013.
58. Rebecca Willis and Nick Eyre, “Demanding Less: Why We Need a New Politics of Energy,” Green
Alliance, October 2011, pp. 9, 26.
59. FOOTNOTE: “EP Opens Option for a Common Charger for Mobile Phones,” European Commission,
press release, March 13, 2014; Adam Minter, Junkyard Planet (New York: Bloomsbury, 2013), 6–7, 67,
70.
60. This quote has been clarified slightly at Anderson’s request. Paul Moseley and Patrick Byrne, “Climate
Expert Targets the Affluent,” BBC, November 13, 2009.
61. Phaedra Ellis-Lamkins, “How Climate Change Affects People of Color,” The Root, March 3, 2013.
62. Tim Jackson, “Let’s Be Less Productive,” New York Times, May 26, 2012.
63. John Stutz, “Climate Change, Development and the Three-Day Week,” Tellus Institute, January 2,
2008, pp. 4-5. See also: Juliet B. Schor, Plenitude: The New Economics of True Wealth (New York:
Penguin Press, 2010); Kyle W. Knight, Eugene A. Rosa, and Juliet B. Schor, “Could Working Less
Reduce Pressures on the Environment? A Cross-National Panel Analysis of OECD Countries, 1970–
2007,” Global Environmental Change 23 (2013): 691-700.
64. Alyssa Battistoni, “Alive in the Sunshine,” Jacobin 13 (2014): 25.
CHAPTER 3: PUBLIC AND PAID FOR
1. Sunita Narain, “Come Out and Claim the Road,” Business Standard, November 10, 2013.
2. George Orwell, The Lion and the Unicorn: Socialism and the English Genius (London: Secker & Warburg,
[1941] 1962), 64.
3. Anna Leidreiter, “Hamburg Citizens Vote to Buy Back Energy Grid,” World Future Council Climate
and Energy Commission, September 25, 2013; personal email communication with Hans Thie,
economic policy advisor, German Bundestag (Left Party), March 14, 2014.
4. Personal email communication with Wiebke Hansen, 20 March 2014.
5. The German data, measuring renewable electricity supply as a share of gross electricity consumption,
differs slightly from the U.S. data, which measures the wind and solar share of net electricity
generation: “Renewable Energy Sources in Germany—Key Information 2013 at a Glance,” German
Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, Working Group on Renewable Energy-Statistics
(AGEE-Stat), http://www.bmwi.de; “Table 1.1.A. Net Generation from Renewable Sources: Total (All
Sectors), 2004–April 2014,” Electric Power Monthly, U.S. Energy Information Administration,

http://www.eia.gov; “Table 1.1. Net Generation by Energy Source: Total (All Sectors), 2004–April
2014,” Electric Power Monthly, U.S. Energy Information Administration. FRANKFURT AND
MUNICH: “City of Frankfurt 100% by 2050,” Go 100% Renewable Energy,
http://www.go100percent.org; “City of Munich,” Go 100% Renewable Energy.
6. “Factbox—German Coalition Agrees on Energy Reforms,” Reuters, November 27, 2013.
7. Leidreiter, “Hamburg Citizens Vote to Buy Back Energy Grid.”
8. Nicholas Brautlecht, “Hamburg Backs EU2 Billion Buyback of Power Grids in Plebiscite,” Bloomberg,
September 23, 2013; personal interview with Elisabeth Mader, spokesperson, German Association of
Utilities, March 20, 2014.
9. “Energy Referendum: Public Buy-Back of Berlin Grid Fails,” Spiegel Online, November 4, 2013; personal
email communication with Arwen Colell, cofounder, BürgerEnergie Berlin (Citizen Energy Berlin),
March 20, 2014.
10. Personal interview with Steve Fenberg, March 19, 2014.
11. “Campaign for Local Power” (video), New Era Colorado, YouTube, September 1, 2013; “Boulder and
Broomfield Counties’ Final 2011 Election Results,” Daily Camera, November 1, 2011.
12. “Campaign for Local Power” (video), YouTube.
13. NETHERLANDS: International Energy Agency, Energy Policies of IEA Countries: The Netherlands;
2008 Review (Paris: International Energy Agency and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development, 2009), 9–11, 62–64; AUSTRIA: International Energy Agency, Energy Policies of IEA
Countries; Austria: 2007 Review (Paris: International Energy Agency and the Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development, 2008), 11–16; NORWAY: International Energy Agency,
Renewable Energy: Medium-Term Market Report 2012; Market Trends and Projections to 2017 (Paris:
International Energy Agency and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development,
2012), 71–76; AUSTIN: “Climate Protection Resolution No. 20070215-023,” 2013 Update, Office of
Sustainability, City of Austin, p. 3, http://www.austin texas.gov; SACRAMENTO: “Our Renewable
Energy Portfolio,” Sacramento Municipal Utility District, https://www.smud.org; “Greenhouse Gas
Reduction,” Sacramento Municipal Utility District, https://www.smud.org.; “LOBBY AS HARD AS
WE CAN”: Personal interview with John Farrell, March 19, 2014.
14. Translation provided by Tadzio Mueller. “Unser Hamburg, Unser Netz,” Hamburger Energienetze in die
öffentliche Hand!, http://unser-netz-hamburg.de.
15. “Energy Technology Perspectives 2012: Pathways to a Clean Energy System,” International Energy
Agency, 2012, p. 149.
16. David Hall et al., “Renewable Energy Depends on the Public Not Private Sector,” Public Services
International Research Unit, University of Greenwich, June 2013, p. 2.
17. Ibid., pp. 2, 3–5.
18. Mark Z. Jacobson and Mark A. Delucchi, “A Plan to Power 100 Percent of the Planet with
Renewables,” Scientific American, November 2009, pp. 58-59; Mark Z. Jacobson and Mark A. Delucchi,
“Providing All Global Energy with Wind, Water, and Solar Power, Part I: Technologies, Energy
Resources, Quantities and Areas of Infrastructure, and Materials,” Energy Policy 39 (2011): 1154–69,
1170–90.
19. Matthew Wright and Patrick Hearps, “Zero Carbon Australia 2020: Stationary Energy Sector Report—
Executive Summary” (2nd ed.), University of Melbourne Energy Research Institute and Beyond Zero
Emissions, August 2011, pp. 2, 6.
20. As of July 2014, the NOAA researchers had presented the results of their 5-year study and expected to
publish in the near future. Alexander MacDonald and Christopher Clack, “Low Cost and Low Carbon
Emission Wind and Solar Energy Systems are Feasible for Large Geographic Domains,” presentation at
Sustainable Energy and Atmospheric Sciences seminar, Earth System Research Laboratory, U.S.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, May 27, 2014; personal email communication
with Alexander MacDonald, director, ESRL, and Christopher Clack, research scientist, ESRL, July 28,
2014.

21. M. M. Hand et al., “Renewable Electricity Futures Study—Volume 1: Exploration of High-Penetration
Renewable Electricity Futures,” National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 2012, pp. xvii–xviii.
22. Mark Z. Jacobson et al., “Examining the Feasibility of Converting New York State’s All-Purpose Energy
Infrastructure to One Using Wind, Water, and Sunlight,” Energy Policy 57 (2013): 585; Elisabeth
Rosenthal, “Life After Oil and Gas,” New York Times, March 23, 2013.
23. Louis Bergeron, “The World Can Be Powered by Alternative Energy, Using Today’s Technology, in
20–40 Years, Says Stanford Researcher Mark Z. Jacobson,” Stanford Report, January 26, 2011;
Elisabeth Rosenthal, “Life After Oil and Gas,” New York Times, March 23, 2013.
24. Personal interview with Nastaran Mohit, November 10, 2012.
25. Steve Kastenbaum, “Relief from Hurricane Sandy Slow for Some,” CNN, November 3, 2012.
26. Johnathan Mahler, “How the Coastline Became a Place to Put the Poor,” New York Times, December 3,
2012; personal interview with Aria Doe, executive director, Action Center for Education and
Community Development, February 3, 2013.
27. Sarah Maslin Nir, “Down to One Hospital, Rockaway Braces for Summer Crowds,” New York Times,
May 20, 2012; personal email communication with Nastaran Mohit, March 28, 2014; Mohit interview,
November 10, 2012.
28. Ibid.; FOOTNOTE: Greg B. Smith, “NYCHA Under Fire for Abandoning Tenants in Hurricane Sandy
Aftermath,” New York Daily News, November 19, 2012.
29. Mohit interview, November 10, 2012.
30. Ibid.
31. Andrew P. Wilper et. al., “Health Insurance and Mortality in U.S. Adults,” American Journal of Public
Health 99 (2009): 2289–95; Mohit, November 10, 2012.
32. Doe interview, February 3, 2013.
33. John Aglionby, Mark Odell, and James Pickford, “Tens of Thousands Without Power After Storm Hits
Western Britain,” Financial Times, February 13, 2014; Tom Bawden, “St. Jude’s Day Storm: Four Dead
After 99mph Winds and Night of Destruction—But at Least We Saw It Coming,” The Independent
(London), October 29, 2013.
34. Alex Marshall, “Environment Agency Cuts: Surviving the Surgeon’s Knife,” The ENDS Report, January
3, 2014; Damian Carrington, “Massive Cuts Risk England’s Ability to Deal with Floods, MPs Say,”
Guardian, January 7, 2014; Damian Carrington, “Hundreds of UK Flood Defence Schemes Unbuilt
Due to Budget Cuts,” Guardian, July 13, 2012.
35. Dave Prentis, “Environment Agency Workers Are Unsung Heroes,” UNISON, January 6, 2014.
36. EM-DAT, International Disaster Database, Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters
(advanced searches), http://www.emdat.be/database; personal email communication with Michael
Mann, March 27, 2014.
37. “Billion-Dollar Weather/Climate Disasters,” National Climatic Data Center, http://www.ncdc
.noaa.gov; “Review of Natural Catastrophes in 2011: Earthquakes Result in Record Loss Year,” Munich
RE, press release, January 4, 2012.
38. Personal interview with Amy Bach, September 18, 2012.
39. “Climate Change: Impacts, Vulnerabilities and Adaptation in Developing Countries,” UNFCCC,
2007, pp. 18–26, 29–38; “Agriculture Needs to Become ‘Climate-Smart,’ ” Food and Agriculture
Organization of the UN, October 28, 2010.
40. “World Economic and Social Survey 2011: The Great Green Technological Transformation,” United
Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2011, pp. xxii, 174.
41. The oil and gas sector was either the most represented or tied for the most represented sector in the top
20 of Fortune’s Global 500 rankings for 2012 and 2013: “Fortune Global 500,” CNN Money, 2013,
http://money.cnn.com; “Fortune Global 500,” CNN Money, 2012, http://money .cnn.com. BLOCKED
PROGRESS: James Hoggan with Richard Littlemore, Climate Cover-Up: The Crusade to Deny Global
Warming (Vancouver: Greystone Books, 2009); $900 BILLION: Daniel J. Weiss, “Big Oil’s Lust for
Tax Loopholes,” Center for American Progress, January 31, 2011; 2011 EARNINGS: “2011 Summary

Annual Report,” ExxonMobil, p. 4; 2012 EARNINGS: “2012 Summary Annual Report,” ExxonMobil,
p. 4; “Exxon’s 2012 Profit of $44.9B Misses Record,” Associated Press, February 1, 2013.
42. BP, for instance, pledged $8 billion for alternative energy in 2005. Saaed Shah, “BP Looks ‘Beyond
Petroleum’ with $8bn Renewables Spend,” The Independent (London), November 29, 2005; BEYOND
PETROLEUM: Terry Macalister and Eleanor Cross, “BP Rebrands on a Global Scale,” Guardian, July
24, 2000; HELIOS MARK: “BP Amoco Unveils New Global Brand to Drive Growth,” press release,
July 24, 2000; BROWNE: Terry Macalister and Eleanor Cross, “BP Rebrands on a Global Scale,”
Guardian, July 24, 2000; CHEVRON: “We Agree: Oil Companies Should Support Renewable Energy”
(video), Chevron, YouTube, 2010; 2009 STUDY: Daniel J. Weiss and Alexandra Kougentakis, “Big
Oil Misers,” Center for American Progress, March 31, 2009; EXECUTIVE PAY: James Osborne,
“Exxon Mobil CEO Rex Tillerson Gets 15 Percent Raise to $40.3 Million,” Dallas Morning News,
April 12, 2013.
43. Antonia Juhasz, “Big Oil’s Lies About Alternative Energy,” Rolling Stone, June 25, 2013; Ben Elgin,
“Chevron Dims the Lights on Green Power,” Bloomberg Businessweek, May 29, 2014; Ben Elgin,
“Chevron Backpedals Again on Renewable Energy,” Bloomberg Businessweek, June 9, 2014
44. Brett Martel, “Jury Finds Big Tobacco Must Pay $590 Million for Stop-Smoking Programs,” Associated
Press, May 21, 2004; Bruce Alpert, “U.S. Supreme Court Keeps Louisiana’s $240 Million Smoking
Cessation Program Intact,” Times-Picayune, June 27, 2011; Sheila McNulty and Ed Crooks, “BP Oil
Spill Pay-outs Hit $5bn Mark,” Financial Times, August 23, 2011; Lee Howell, “Global Risks 2013,”
World Economic Forum, 2013, p. 19.
45. Marc Lee, “Building a Fair and Effective Carbon Tax to Meet BC’s Greenhouse Gas Targets,” Canadian
Centre for Policy Alternatives, August 2012.
46. U.S. Department of Defense emissions were calculated using the federal Greenhouse Gas Inventory for
fiscal year 2011 (total Scope 1 emissions, excluding biogenic). “Fiscal Year 2011 Greenhouse Gas
Inventory,” U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, June 14,
2013, http://energy.gov; “Greenhouse Gas 100 Polluters Index,” Political Economy Research Institute,
University of Massachusetts Amherst, June 2013, http://www.peri.umass.edu.
47. Borgar Aamaas, Jens Borken-Kleefeld, and Glen P. Peters, “The Climate Impact of Travel Behavior: A
German Case Study with Illustrative Mitigation Options,” Environmental Science & Policy 33 (2013):
273, 276.
48. Thomas Piketty, Capital in the Twenty-First Century, trans. Arthur Goldhammer (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 2014); Gar Lipow, Solving the Climate Crisis through Social Change: Public
Investment in Social Prosperity to Cool a Fevered Planet (Santa Barbara: Praeger, 2012), 56; Stephen W.
Pacala, “Equitable Solutions to Greenhouse Warming: On the Distribution of Wealth, Emissions and
Responsibility Within and Between Nations,” presentation to International Institute for Applied
Systems Analysis, November 2007, p. 3.
49. “Innovative Financing at a Global and European Level,” European Parliament, resolution, March 8,
2011, http://www.europarl.europa.eu.
50. “Revealed: Global Super-Rich Has at Least $21 Trillion Hidden in Secret Tax Havens,” Tax Justice
Network, press release, July 22, 2012.
51. “World Economic and Social Survey 2012: In Search of New Development Finance,” United Nations
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2012, p. 44.
52. Sam Perlo-Freeman, et. al., “Trends in World Military Expenditure, 2012,” Stockholm International
Peace Research Institute, April 2013 http://sipri.org.
53. “Mobilizing Climate Finance: A Paper Prepared at the Request of G20 Finance Ministers,” World Bank
Group, October 6, 2011, p.15, http://www.imf.org.
54. “Governments Should Phase Out Fossil Fuel Subsidies or Risk Lower Economic Growth, Delayed
Investment in Clean Energy and Unnecessary Climate Change Pollution,” Oil Change International
and Natural Resources Defense Council, June 2012, p. 2.
55. For a more in-depth, U.S.-focused discussion of raising climate funds from these kinds of sources, see

Lipow, Solving the Climate Crisis through Social Change, 55-61.
56. For much more on rationing, climate change, and environmental and economic justice, see: Stan Cox,
Any Way You Slice It: The Past, Present, and Future of Rationing (New York: The New Press, 2013). 16
PERCENT: Ina Zweiniger-Bargielowska, Austerity in Britain: Rationing, Controls, and Consumption,
1939–1955 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), 55, 58.
57. Nicholas Timmins, “When Britain Demanded Fair Shares for All,” The Independent (London), July 27,
1995; Martin J. Manning and Clarence R. Wyatt, Encyclopedia of Media and Propaganda in Wartime
America, Vol. 1 (Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO: 2011), 533; Terrence H. Witkowski, “The
American Consumer Home Front During World War II,” Advances in Consumer Research 25 (1998).
58. Rationing, How and Why? pamphlet, Office of Price Administration, 1942, p. 3.
59. Donald Thomas, The Enemy Within: Hucksters, Racketeers, Deserters and Civilians During the Second
World War (New York: New York University Press, 2003), 29; Hugh Rockoff, Drastic Measures: A
History of Wage and Price Controls in the United States (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984),
166–67.
60. Jimmy Carter, “Crisis of Confidence” speech (transcript), American Experience, PBS.
61. “The Pursuit of Progress” (video), Richard Heffner’s Open Mind, PBS, February 10, 1991.
62. Eleanor Taylor, “British Social Attitudes 28,” Chapter 6, Environment, NatCen Social Research, p.
104.
63. Will Dahlgreen, “Broad Support for 50P Tax,” YouGov, January 28, 2014; “Nine in Ten Canadians
Support Taxing the Rich ‘More’ (88%) and a Potential ‘Millionaire’s Tax’ (89%),” Ipsos, May 30,
2013; Anthony Leiserowitz et al., “Public Support for Climate and Energy Policies in November 2013,”
Yale Project on Climate Change Communication and George Mason University Center for Climate
Change Communication, November 2013; “Voter Attitudes Toward Pricing Carbon and a Clean
Energy Refund” (memo), Public Opinion Strategies, April 21, 2010.
64. “Americans Support Limits on CO2,” Yale Project on Climate Change Communication, April 2014.

CHAPTER 4: PLANNING AND BANNING
1. John Berger, Keeping a Rendezvous (New York: Pantheon, 1991), 156.
2. James Gustave Speth, The Bridge at the End of the World: Capitalism, the Environment, and Crossing from
Crisis to Sustainability (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008), 178.
3. “The Second McCain-Obama Presidential Debate” (transcript), Commission on Presidential Debates,
October 7, 2008.
4. Sam Gindin, “The Auto Crisis: Placing Our Own Alternative on the Table,” Bullet/Socialist Project,
E-Bulletin No. 200, April 9, 2009.
5. Ricardo Fuentes-Nieva and Nick Galasso, “Working for the Few,” Oxfam, January 20, 2014, p. 2;
FOOTNOTE: Jason Walsh, “European Workers Rebel as G-20 Looms,” Christian Science Monitor, April
1, 2009; Rupert Hall, “Swansea Factory Workers Start Production at Former Remploy Site,” Wales
Online, October 14, 2013; Alejandra Cancino, “Former Republic Windows and Doors Workers Learn
to Be Owners,” Chicago Tribune, November 6, 2013.
6. According to U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics data, the net loss in manufacturing jobs between January
2008 and January 2014 was 114,500; “Employment, Hours, and Earnings from the Current Employment
Statistics Survey (National),” U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, http://data.bls.gov.
7. Michael Grunwald, The New New Deal: The Hidden Story of Change in the Obama Era (New York:
Simon & Schuster, 2012), 10–11, 163–168; “Expert Reaction to Two New Nature Papers on Climate,”
Science Media Centre, December 4, 2011.
8. Roger Lowenstein, “The Nixon Shock,” Bloomberg Businessweek Magazine, August 4, 2011; Bruce
Bartlett, “Keynes and Keynesianism,” New York Times, May 14, 2013.
9. The 3.7 million jobs estimate comes from the Apollo Alliance Project, which merged with the
BlueGreen Alliance in 2011. “Make It in America: The Apollo Clean Transportation Manufacturing
Action Plan,” Apollo Alliance, October 2010; Smart Growth America, “Recent Lessons from the
Stimulus: Transportation Funding and Job Creation,” February 2011, p. 2.
10. “Working Towards Sustainable Development: Opportunities for Decent Work and Social Inclusion in a
Green Economy,” International Labour Organization, May 2012.
11. “More Bang for Our Buck,” BlueGreen Canada, November 2012; Jonathan Neale, “Our Jobs, Our
Planet: Transport Workers and Climate Change,” A report originally written for the European
Transport Workers Federation, October 2011, p. 49; “About,” One Million Climate Jobs,
http://www.climatejobs.org.
12. Will Dahlgreen, “Nationalise Energy and Rail Companies, Say Public,” YouGov, November 4, 2013.
13. “2011 Wind Technologies Market Report,” U.S. Department of Energy, August 2012, p. iii; Matthew
L. Wald, “New Energy Struggles on Its Way to Markets,” New York Times, December 27, 2013.
14. Personal interview with Ben Parfitt, September 21, 2013.
15. Michelle Kinman and Antonia Juhasz, ed., “The True Cost of Chevron: An Alternative Annual
Report,” True Cost of Chevron Network, May 2011, pp. 12, 18, 22, 43; Patrick Radden Keefe,
“Reversal of Fortune,” The New Yorker, January 9, 2012; Pierre Thomas et al., “B.P.’s Dismal Safety
Record,” ABC News, May 27, 2010; Alan Levin, “Oil Companies Fought Stricter Regulation,” USA
Today, May 20, 2010; Chip Cummins et al., “Five Who Laid Groundwork for Historic Spike in Oil
Market,” Wall Street Journal, December 20, 2005.
16. Seth Klein, “Moving Towards Climate Justice: Overcoming Barriers to Change,” Canadian Centre for
Policy Alternatives, April 2012.
17. Lucia Kassai, “Brazil to Boost Oil Exports as Output Triples, IEA Says,” Bloomberg, November 12,
2013; Jeffrey Jones, “Statoil, PTTEP Deal to Test Tighter Oil Sands Rules,” Globe and Mail, January
30, 2014; “PetroChina Buys Entire Alberta Oilsands Project,” Canadian Press, January 3, 2012.

18. David Bollier, Think Like a Commoner: A Short Introduction to the Life of the Commons (Gabriola Island,
BC: New Society Publishers, 2014).
19. Personal interview with Hans Thie, economic policy advisor, German Bundestag (Left Party), March
20, 2014; “Solarstrombranche (Photovoltaik),” Statistische Zahlen der deutschen, BSW Solar, April
2014, p. 1; “Status Des Windenergieausbasus An Land In Deutschland,” Deutsche WindGuard, 2013,
p. 1; “Flyer: Renewably Employed!” Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation,
Building and Nuclear Safety, August 2013.
20. Hans Thie, “The Controversial Energy Turnaround in Germany: Successes, Contradictions,
Perspectives,” Vienna Theses, July 2013.
21. “Danish Key Figures,” Facts and Figures, Danish Energy Agency, 2010, http://www.ens.dk/en; personal
email communication with Carsten Vittrup, strategic energy consultant, Energinet.dk, March 20,
2014.
22. Russ Christianson, “Danish Wind Co-ops Can Show Us the Way,” Wind-Works, August 3, 2005.
23. Personal interview with Dimitra Spatharidou, May 20, 2013.
24. Andrea Stone, “Family Farmers Hold Keys to Agriculture in a Warming World,” National Geographic,
May 2, 2014.
25. Calogero Carletto, Sara Savastano, and Alberto Zezza, “Fact or Artifact: The Impact of Measurement
Errors on the Farm Size–Productivity Relationship,” Journal of Development Economics 103 (2013): 254261; “Typhoon Haiyan Exposes the Reality of Climate Injustice,” La Via Campesina, press release,
December 4, 2013; Raj Patel, Stuffed and Starved: The Hidden Battle for the World Food System
(Brooklyn: Melville House, 2012), 6-7.
26. De Schutter’s analysis has been echoed by mainstream development bodies including the U.N.
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) and the International Assessment of
Agricultural Knowledge, Science and Technology for Development (IAASTD), both of which have
issued reports in recent years that have held up small-scale agroecological farming, particularly when
land is controlled by women, as key solutions to both the climate crisis and to persistent poverty. See:
“Trade and Environment Review 2013: Wake Up Before It Is Too Late,” United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, 2013; “Agriculture at a Crossroads: Synthesis Report,” International
Assessment of Agriculture Knowledge, Science and Technology for Development, 2009. “LARGE
SEGMENT”: “Eco-Farming Can Double Food Production in 10 Years, Says New UN Report,” United
Nations, Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, press release, March 8, 2011.
27. Verena Seufert, Navin Ramankutty, and Jonathan A. Foley, “Comparing the Yields of Organic and
Conventional Agriculture,” Nature 485 (2012): 229-232; “Eco-Farming Can Double Food Production
in 10 Years, Says New UN Report,” United Nations.
28. Personal email communication with Raj Patel, June 6, 2014.
29. Ibid.
30. Thie interview, March 20, 2014; “Greenhouse Gas Emissions Rise Slightly Again in 2013, by 1.2
Percent,” German Federal Environment Agency (UBA), press release, March 10, 2014.
31. Thie interview, March 20, 2014; Helen Pidd, “Germany to Shut All Nuclear Reactors,” Guardian, May
30, 2011; Peter Friederici, “WW II-Era Law Keeps Germany Hooked on ‘Brown Coal’ Despite
Renewables Shift,” InsideClimate News, October 1, 2013.
32. Mark Z. Jacobson and Mark A. Delucchi, “A Plan to Power 100 Percent of the Planet with
Renewables,” Scientific American, November 2009, pp. 58-59; Mark Z. Jacobson, “Nuclear Power Is
Too Risky,” CNN, February 22, 2010; Real Time with Bill Maher, HBO, episode 188, June 11, 2010.
33. Net electricity generation from nuclear was 11.9% of the world total in 2011, the most recent year with
complete data from the U.S. Energy Information Administration. “International Energy Statistics,”
U.S. Energy Information Administration, http://www.eia.gov.
34. Sven Teske, “Energy Revolution: A Sustainable EU 27 Energy Outlook,” Greenpeace International and
the European Renewable Energy Council, 2012, p. 11.
35. Thie interview, March 20, 2014; Andreas Rinke, “Merkel Signals Support for Plan to Lift Carbon

Prices,” Reuters, October 16, 2013.
36. Personal email communication with Tadzio Mueller, March 14, 2014.
37. “Development of Baseline Data and Analysis of Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions of PetroleumBased Fuels,” U.S. Department of Energy, National Energy Technology Laboratory, DOE/NETL2009/1346, 2008, p. 13.
38. Bill McKibben, “Join Us in Civil Disobedience to Stop the Keystone XL Tar-Sands Pipeline,” Grist,
June 23, 2011.
39. James Hansen, “Game Over for the Climate,” New York Times, May 9, 2012.
40. Barack Obama, “Barack Obama’s Remarks in St. Paul” speech, St. Paul, Minnesota, New York Times,
June 3, 2008.
41. “Remarks by the President on Climate Change,” speech, Washington, D.C., June 25, 2013, White
House Office of the Press Secretary.
42. Jackie Calmes and Michael D. Shear, “Interview with President Obama,” New York Times, July 27,
2013.
43. “Presidential Memorandum—Power Sector Carbon Pollution Standards,” White House Office of the
Press Secretary, June 25, 2013, http://www.whitehouse.gov; Mark Hertsgaard, “A Top Obama Aide
Says History Won’t Applaud the President’s Climate Policy,” Harper’s, June 2, 2014.
44. Keynote Address (video), 6th International Conference on Climate Change, The Heartland Institute,
June 30, 2011.
45. Robert W. Howarth, Renee Santoro, and Anthony Ingraffea, “Methane and the Greenhouse-Gas
Footprint of Natural Gas from Shale Formations,” Climatic Change 106 (2011): 679–90.
46. Ibid., 681-85, 687; Gunnar Myhre et al., “Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing,” in Climate
Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. T. F. Stocker et al. (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2013), 714.
47. Ibid.; personal interview with Robert Howarth, April 10, 2014.
48. Howarth provides a helpful overview of subsequent research on methane emissions from shale gas,
arguing that this work has bolstered the key conclusions of the 2011 paper, in: Robert W. Howarth, “A
Bridge to Nowhere: Methane Emissions and the Greenhouse Gas Footprint of Natural Gas,” Energy
Science & Engineering 2(2014): 47–60. FIRST PEER-REVIEWED: Howarth, Santoro, and Ingraffea,
“Methane and the Greenhouse-Gas Footprint of Natural Gas from Shale Formations,” 687; QUICK
TO VOLUNTEER: Bryan Schutt, “Methane Emissions ‘Achilles’ Heel’ of Shale Gas, Cornell
Professor Contends,” SNL Daily Gas Report, May 23, 2011; LACK OF TRANSPARENCY: Robert
W. Howarth, Renee Santoro, and Anthony Ingraffea, “Venting and Leaking of Methane from Shale
Gas Development: Response to Cathles et al.,” Climatic Change 113 (2012): 539–40; FOOTNOTE:
“U.S. Energy-Related Carbon Dioxide Emissions, 2012,” U.S. Energy Information Administration,
October 2013, p. ii; Scot M. Miller et al., “Anthropogenic emissions of methane in the United States,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110 (2013): 20018–20022; “Changing the Game?
Emissions and Market Implications of New Natural Gas Supplies,” Energy Modeling Forum, Stanford
University, EMF Report No. 26, Vol. 1, September 2013, p. vii; Shakeb Afsah and Kendyl Salcito, “Us
Coal Exports Erode All Co2 Savings from Shale Gas,” CO2 Scorecard Group, March 24, 2014,
http://www.co2scorecard.org.
49. Stefan Wagstyl, “German Coal Use at Highest Level Since 1990,” Financial Times, January 7, 2014;
Stefan Nicola and Ladka Bauerova, “In Europe, Dirty Coal Makes a Comeback,” Bloomberg
Businessweek, February 27, 2014.
50. Chester Dawson and Carolyn King, “Exxon Unit Seeks Canada Approval for Oil-Sands Project,” Wall
Street Journal, December 17, 2013; “Environmental Responsibility,” Kearl, Operations, Imperial,
http://www.imperialoil.ca; “Fuel for Thought: The Economic Benefits of Oil Sands Investment for
Canada’s Regions,” Conference Board of Canada, October 2012, pp. 3, 9.
51. Leila Coimbra and Sabrina Lorenzi, “BG to Spend $30 Billion on Brazil Offshore Oil by 2025,” Reuters,

May 24, 2012; “Chevron Announces $39.8 Billion Capital and Exploratory Budget for 2014,”
Chevron, press release, December 11, 2013; “Gorgon Project Overview,” Chevron, May 2014, pp. 1-2,
http://www.chevronaustralia.com; Andrew Callus, “Record-Breaking Gas Ship Launched, Bigger One
Planned,” Reuters, December 3, 2013; “A Revolution in Natural Gas Production,” Shell Global,
http://www.shell.com.
52. “Gorgon Project Overview,” p. 1; “Prelude FLNG in Numbers,” Shell Global, http://www.shell.com;
“Operations: Kearl Oil Sands Project,” Overview, Imperial Oil, http://www.imperialoil.ca; “Sunrise
Energy Project,” Husky Energy, http://www.huskyenergy.com; Kevin Anderson and Alice Bows,
“Beyond ‘Dangerous’ Climate Change: Emission Scenarios for a New World,” Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society A 369 (2011): 35.
53. “Reserve-Replacement Ratio,” Investopedia Dictionary, http://www.investopedia.com.
54. Fred Pals, “Shell Lagged Behind BP in Replacing Reserves in 2008,” Bloomberg, March 17, 2009;
“Royal Dutch Shell Plc Strategy Update 2009—Final,” Fair Disclosure Wire, March 17, 2009; Robin
Pagnamenta, “Anger as Shell Cuts Back on Its Investment in Renewables,” The Times (London),
March 18, 2009; “Royal Dutch Shell Plc Updates on Strategy to Improve Performance and Grow,”
Royal Dutch Shell, press release, March 16, 2010; Robert Perkins, “Shell Eyes 2012 Output of 3.5
Million Boe/d,” Platts Oilgram Price Report, March 17, 2010.
55. “World Energy Outlook 2013,” International Energy Agency, 2013, pp. 471–72.
56. “Exxon Mobil Corporation Announces 2011 Reserves Replacement,” ExxonMobil, press release,
February 23, 2012.
57. The figures given in this passage can vary, as there are different estimates of the carbon budget for
limiting warming to 2°C. The original Carbon Tracker report relied on a seminal Nature paper
published in 2009: James Leaton, “Unburnable Carbon: Are the World’s Financial Markets Carrying a
Carbon Bubble?” Carbon Tracker Initiative, 2011, pp. 6–7; Malte Meinshausen et al., “GreenhouseGas Emission Targets for Limiting Global Warming to 2°C,” Nature 458 (2009): 1161. For an updated
analysis from Carbon Tracker, refer to: James Leaton et al., “Unburnable Carbon 2013: Wasted
Capital and Stranded Assets,” Carbon Tracker Initiative, 2013. For 2 degree carbon budget estimates
in the latest IPCC Assessment Report, see: “Summary for Policymakers,” in Climate Change 2013: The
Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. T. F. Stocker et al. (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2013), 27–28. “THE THING TO NOTICE”: Bill McKibben, speech, New York City, Do the
Math Tour, 350.org, November 16, 2012.
58. John Fullerton, “The Big Choice,” Capital Institute, July 19, 2011; Leaton, “Unburnable Carbon,” p. 6.
59. Total oil and gas industry lobby spending in 2013 was $144,878,531, according to the Center for
Responsive Politics: “Oil & Gas,” OpenSecrets.org, Center for Responsive Politics, https://www
.opensecrets.org; ELECTION SPENDING: “Oil and Gas: Long-Term Contribution Trends,”
OpenSecrets.org, Center for Responsive Politics, https://www.opensecrets.org.
60. Daniel Cayley-Daoust and Richard Girard, “Big Oil’s Oily Grasp: The Making of Canada as a PetroState and How Oil Money is Corrupting Canadian Politics,” Polaris Institute, December 2012, p. 3;
Damian Carrington, “Energy Companies Have Lent More Than 50 Staff to Government
Departments,” Guardian, December 5, 2011.
61. Google Finance historical price records for ExxonMobil, Chevron, Royal Dutch Shell, ConocoPhillips,
BP, Anglo American, and Arch Coal between the dates of December 1, 2009 and December 31, 2009,
particularly December 18.
62. Suzanne Goldenberg, “Exxon Mobil Agrees to Report on Climate Change’s Effect on Business Model,”
Guardian, March 20, 2014; “Energy and Carbon—Managing the Risks,” ExxonMobil, 2014, pp. 1, 8,
16.
63. Personal email communication with John Ashton, March 20, 2014.
64. Mark Dowie, Losing Ground: American Environmentalism at the Close of the Twentieth Century
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996), 25.

65. Yotam Marom, “Confessions of a Climate Change Denier,” Waging Nonviolence, July 30, 2013.
66. “Paxman vs. Brand—Full Interview” (video), BBC Newsnight, October 23, 2013.
67. “System Change—Not Climate Change,” A People’s Declaration from Klimaforum09, December 2009.
68. Miya Yoshitani, “Confessions of a Climate Denier in Tunisia,” Asian Pacific Environment Network,
May 8, 2013.
69. Nick Cohen, “The Climate Change Deniers Have Won,” The Observer, March 22, 2014.
70. Philip Radford, “The Environmental Case for a Path to Citizenship,” Huffington Post, March 14, 2013;
Anna Palmer and Darren Samuelsohn, “Sierra Club Backs Immigration Reform,” Politico, April 24,
2013; “Statement on Immigration Reform,” BlueGreen Alliance, http://www .bluegreenalliance.org;
May Boeve, “Solidarity with the Immigration Reform Movement,” 350 .org, March 22, 2013,
http://350.org.
71. Pamela Gossin, Encyclopedia of Literature and Science (Westport, CT: Greenwood, 2002), 208; William
Blake, “And Did Those Feet in Ancient Time,” poem in The Complete Poetry and Prose of William Blake
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2008), 95.
72. Personal interview with Colin Miller, March 14, 2011; Simon Romero, “Bus-Fare Protests Hit Brazil’s
Two Biggest Cities,” New York Times, June 13, 2013; Larry Rohter, “Brazil’s Workers Take to Streets in
One-Day Strike,” New York Times, July 11, 2013.

CHAPTER 5: BEYOND EXTRACTIVISM
1. Steve Stockman, Twitter post, March 21, 2013, 2:33 p.m. ET, https://twitter.com.
2. Ben Dangl, “Miners Just Took 43 Police Officers Hostage in Bolivia,” Vice, April 3, 2014.
3. Rodrigo Castro et al., “Human-Nature Interaction in World Modeling with Modelica,” prepared for the
Proceedings of the 10th International Modelica Conference, March 10–12, 2014, http://www.ep.liu.se.
4. Personal interview with Nerida-Ann Steshia Hubert, March 30, 2012.
5. Hermann Joseph Hiery, The Neglected War: The German South Pacific and the Influence of World War I
(Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 1995), 116–25, 241; “Nauru,” New Zealand Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and Trade, updated December 9, 2013, http://wwww.mfat.govt.nz; “Nauru” (video), NFSA
Australia, NFSA Films.
6. Charles J. Hanley, “Tiny Pacific Isle’s Citizens Rich, Fat and Happy—Thanks to the Birds,” Associated
Press, March 31, 1985; Steshia Hubert interview, March 30, 2012.
7. “Country Profile and National Anthem,” Permanent Mission of the Republic of Nauru to the United
Nations, United Nations, http://www.un.int; Jack Hitt, “The Billion-Dollar Shack,” New York Times
Magazine, December 10, 2000.
8. Hiery, The Neglected War, 116–25, 241; “Nauru,” New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
9. Hitt, “The Billion-Dollar Shack”; David Kendall, “Doomed Island,” Alternatives Journal, January 2009.
10. “Nauru” (video), NFSA Films.
11. Philip Shenon, “A Pacific Island Is Stripped of Everything,” New York Times, December 10, 1995.
12. Hitt, “The Billion-Dollar Shack”; Robert Matau, “Road Deaths Force Nauru to Review Traffic Laws,”
Islands Business, July 10, 2013; “The Fattest Place on Earth” (video), Nightline, ABC, January 3, 2011;
Steshia Hubert interview, March 30, 2012.
13. Hitt, “The Billion-Dollar Shack”; “Nauru,” Country Profile, U.N. Data, http://data.un.org.
14. “Nauru,” Overview, Rand McNally, http://education.randmcnally.com; Tony Thomas, “The Naughty
Nation of Nauru,” The Quadrant, January/February 2013; Andrew Kaierua et al., “Nauru,” in Climate
Change in the Pacific, Scientific Assessment and New Research, Volume 2: Country Reports, Australian
Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO, 2011, pp. 134, 140; “Fresh Water Supplies a Continual Challenge
to the Region,” Applied Geoscience and Technology Division, Secretariat of the Pacific Community,
press release, January 18, 2011.
15. Glenn Albrecht, “The Age of Solastalgia,” The Conversation, August 7, 2012.
16. Kendall, “Doomed Island.”
17. “Nauru: Phosphate Roller Coaster; Elections with Tough Love Theme,” August 13, 2007, via
WikiLeaks, http://www.wikileaks.org.
18. Nick Bryant, “Will New Nauru Asylum Centre Deliver Pacific Solution?” BBC News, June 20, 2013;
Rob Taylor, “Ruling Clouds Future of Australia Detention Center,” Wall Street Journal, January 30,
2014; “Nauru Camp a Human Rights Catastrophe with No End in Sight,” Amnesty International,
press release, November 23, 2012; “What We Found on Nauru,” Amnesty International, December 17,
2012; “Hundreds Continue 11-Day Nauru Hunger Strike,” ABC News (Australia), November 12,
2012.
19. Bryant, “Will New Nauru Asylum Centre Deliver Pacific Solution?”; Oliver Laughland, “Nauru
Immigration Detention Centre—Exclusive Pictures,” Guardian, December 6, 2013; “Hundreds
Continue 11-Day Nauru Hunger Strike,” ABC News (Australia); “Police Attend Full-Scale Riot at
Asylum Seeker Detention Centre on Nauru,” ABC News (Australia), July 20, 2013.
20. “Nauru Camp a Human Rights Catastrophe with No End in Sight,” Amnesty International, press
release, November 23, 2012; “UNHCR Monitoring Visit to the Republic of Nauru, 7 to 9 October
2013,” United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, November 26, 2013; Mark Isaacs, The

Undesirables (Richmond, Victoria: Hardie Grant Books, 2014), 99; Deborah Snow, “Asylum Seekers:
Nothing to Lose, Desperation on Nauru,” Sydney Morning Herald, March 15, 2014.
21. “The Middle of Nowhere,” This American Life, December 5, 2003, http://www.thisamericanlife .org;
Mitra Mobasherat and Ben Brumfield, “Riot on a Tiny Island Highlights Australia Shutting a Door on
Asylum,” CNN, July 20, 2013; Rosamond Dobson Rhone, “Nauru, the Richest Island in the South
Seas,” National Geographic 40 (1921): 571, 585.
22. Marcus Stephen, “On Nauru, a Sinking Feeling,” New York Times, July 18, 2011.
23. Francis Bacon, De Dignitate et Augmentis Scientiarum, Works, ed. James Spedding, Robert Leslie Ellis,
and Douglas Devon Heath, Vol. 4 (London: Longmans Green, 1870), 296.
24. William Derham, Physico-Theology: or, A demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God, from His
Works of Creation (London: Printed for Robinson and Roberts, 1768), 110.
25. Barbara Freese, Coal: A Human History (New York: Penguin, 2004), 44.
26. Emphasis in original. Many of the sources in this recounting were originally cited in Andreas Malm,
“The Origins of Fossil Capital: From Water to Steam in the British Cotton Industry,” Historical
Materialism 21 (2013): 31.
27. J. R. McCulloch [unsigned], “Babbage on Machinery and Manufactures,” Edinburgh Review 56 (January
1833): 313–32; François Arago, Historical Eloge of James Watt, trans. James Patrick Muirhead (London:
J. Murray, 1839), 150.
28. C. H. Turner, Proceedings of the Public Meeting Held at Freemasons’ Hall, on the 18th June, 1824, for
Erecting a Monument to the Late James Watt (London: J. Murray, 1824), pp. 3–4, as cited in Andreas
Malm, “Steam: Nineteenth-Century Mechanization and the Power of Capital,” in Ecology and Power:
Struggles over Land and Material Resources in the Past, Present, and Future, eds. Alf Hornborg, Brett
Clark, and Kenneth Hermele (London: Routledge, 2013), 119.
29. M. A. Alderson, An Essay on the Nature and Application of Steam: With an Historical Notice of the Rise and
Progressive Improvement of the Steam-Engine (London: Sherwood, Gilbert and Piper, 1834), 44.
30. Asa Briggs, The Power of Steam: An Illustrated History of the World’s Steam Age (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1982), 72.
31. Jackson J. Spielvogel, Western Civilization: A Brief History, Volume II: Since 1500, 8th ed. (Boston:
Wadsworth, 2014), 445.
32. Herman E. Daly and Joshua Farley, Ecological Economics: Principles and Applications (Washington, D.C.:
Island Press, 2011), 10.
33. Rebecca Newberger Goldstein, “What’s in a Name? Rivalries and the Birth of Modern Science,” in
Seeing Further: The Story of Science, Discovery, and the Genius of the Royal Society, ed. Bill Bryson
(London: Royal Society, 2010), 120.
34. Ralph Waldo Emerson, The Conduct of Life (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 1903), 70.
35. Clive Hamilton, “The Ethical Foundations of Climate Engineering,” in Climate Change Geoengineering:
Philosophical Perspectives, Legal Issues, and Governance Frameworks, ed. Wil C. G. Burns and Andrew L.
Strauss (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013), 58.
36. Esperanza Martínez, “The Yasuní—ITT Initiative from a Political Economy and Political Ecology
Perspective,” in Leah Temper et al., “Towards a Post-Oil Civilization: Yasunization and Other
Initiatives to Leave Fossil Fuels in the Soil,” EJOLT Report No. 6, May 2013, p. 12.
37. Jean-Paul Sartre, Critique of Dialectical Reason, trans. Alan Sheridan-Smith (London: Verso, 2004), 154;
Tim Flannery, Here on Earth: A Natural History of the Planet (New York: Grove), 185.
38. Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. 3, as cited in John Bellamy Foster, Marx’s Ecology: Materialism and Nature
(New York: Monthly Review Press, 2000), 155.
39. “Yearly Emissions: 1987,” CAIT database, World Resources Institute, http://cait.wri.org; Nicholas
Stern, The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
[2006] 2007), 231; Judith Shapiro, Mao’s War Against Nature: Politics and the Environment in
Revolutionary China (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001); Mara Hvistendahl, “China’s
Three Gorges Dam: An Environmental Catastrophe?” Scientific American, March 25, 2008; Will

Kennedy and Stephen Bierman, “Free Khodorkovsky to Find Oil Industry Back in State Control,”
Bloomberg, December 20, 2013; Tom Metcalf, “Russian Richest Lost $13 Billion as Global Stocks
Fell,” Bloomberg, March 4, 2014.
40. ROUGHLY 81 PERCENT: “Stockholm Action Plan for Climate and Energy, 2012–2015: With an
Outlook to 2030,” Stockholm Environment and Health Administration, p. 12; MAJORITY STATEOWNED: “Annual Report on Form 20-F,” Statoil, 2013, p. 117, http://www.statoil.com; TAR
SANDS: “Oil Sands,” Statoil, http://www.statoil.com; ARCTIC: “Large-Scale Arctic Oil and Gas
Drilling Decades Away,” Reuters, November 29, 2013; “Statoil Stepping Up in the Arctic,” Statoil,
press release, August 28, 2012; IRAQ: “Iraq,” Our Operations, Annual Report 2011, Statoil,
http://www.statoil.com; Stephen A. Carney, “Allied Participation in Operation Iraqi Freedom,”
Center of Military History, United States Army, 2011, http://www.history.army.mil.
41. Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada (IPEA) data, http://www.ipeadata.gov.br; Mark Weisbrot
and Jake Johnston, “Venezuela’s Economic Recovery: Is It Sustainable?” Center for Economic and
Policy Research, September 2012, p. 26; “Ecuador Overview,” Ecuador, World Bank,
http://www.worldbank.org; “Population Below National Poverty Line, Urban, Percentage,” Millienium
Development Goals Database, U.N. Data, http://data.un.org.
42. “Bolivia: Staff Report for the 2013 Article IV Consultation,” International Monetary Fund, February
2014, p. 6.
43. Luis Hernández Navarro, “Bolivia Has Transformed Itself by Ignoring the Washington Consensus,”
Guardian, March 21, 2012.
44. ECUADOR: Nick Miroff, “In Ecuador, Oil Boom Creates Tensions,” Washington Post, February 16,
2014; BOLIVIA AND VENEZUELA: Dan Luhnow and José de Córdoba, “Bolivia Seizes Natural-Gas
Fields in a Show of Energy Nationalism,” Wall Street Journal, May 2, 2006; ARGENTINA: “Argentine
Province Suspends Open-Pit Gold Mining Project Following Protests,” MercoPress, January 31, 2012;
“GREEN DESERTS”: “The Green Desert,” The Economist, August 6, 2004; BRAZIL: “The Rights and
Wrongs of Belo Monte,” The Economist, May 4, 2013; RAW RESOURCES: Exports of Primary
Products as Percentage of Total Exports, “Statistical Yearbook for Latin America and the Caribbean,”
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, United Nations, 2012, p. 101; CHINA:
Joshua Schneyer and Nicolás Medina Mora Pérez, “Special Report: How China Took Control of an
OPEC Country’s Oil,” Reuters, November 26, 2013.
45. Eduardo Gudynas, “Buen Vivir: Today’s Tomorrow,” Development 54 (2011): 442–43; Martínez in
Temper et al., “Towards a Post-Oil Civilization,” p.17; Eduardo Gudynas, “The New Extractivism of
the 21st Century: Ten Urgent Theses About Extractivism in Relation to Current South American
Progressivism,” Americas Program Report, Washington, D.C.: Center for International Policy, January
21, 2010.
46. Personal interview with Alexis Tsipras, May 23, 2013.
47. Patricia Molina, “The ‘Amazon Without Oil’ Campaign: Oil Activity in Mosetén Territory,” in
Temper et al., “Towards a Post-Oil Civilization,” p. 75.
48. William T. Hornaday, Wild Life Conservation in Theory and Practice (New Haven: Yale University Press,
1914), v–vi.
49. “Who Was John Muir?” Sierra Club, http://www.sierraclub.org; John Muir, The Yosemite (New York:
Century, 1912), 261–62.
50. Bradford Torrey, ed., The Writings of Henry David Thoreau: Journal, September 16, 1851–April 30, 1852
(New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1906), 165; Aldo Leopold, A Sand County Almanac (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1949), 171; FOOTNOTE: Henry David Thoreau, Walden (New York: Thomas Y.
Crowell, 1910), 393–94.
51. Leopold, A Sand Counrty Almanac, 171; Jay N. Darling to Aldo Leopold, November 20, 1935, Aldo
Leopold Archives, University of Wisconsin Digital Collections.
52. Rachel Carson, Silent Spring (New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1962), 57, 68, 297.
53. Ibid., 297.

54. Christian Parenti, “ ‘The Limits to Growth’: A Book That Launched a Movement,” The Nation,
December 5, 2012.

PART II: MAGICAL THINKING
1. William Barnes and Nils Gilman, “Green Social Democracy or Barbarism: Climate Change and the
End of High Modernism,” in The Deepening Crisis: Governance Challenges After Neoliberalism, ed. Craig
Calhoun and Georgi Derluguian (New York: New York University Press, 2011), 50.
2. Christine MacDonald, Green, Inc.: An Environmental Insider Reveals How a Good Cause Has Gone Bad
(Guilford, CT: Lyons Press, 2008), 236.
CHAPTER 6: FRUITS, NOT ROOTS
1. Barry Commoner, “A Reporter at Large: The Environment,” New Yorker, June 15, 1987.
2. Eric Pooley, The Climate War (New York: Hyperion, 2010), 351–52.
3. Valgene W. Lehmann, “Attwater’s Prairie Chicken—Its Life History and Management,” North
American Fauna 57, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior, 1941, pp. 6–7;
“Attwater’s Prairie-Chicken Recovery Plan,” Second Revision, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 2010, p.
5.
4. “Texas Milestones,” The Nature Conservancy, http://www.nature.org.
5. Joe Stephens and David B. Ottaway, “How a Bid to Save a Species Came to Grief,” Washington Post,
May 5, 2003; “Texas City Prairie Preserve,” Nature Conservancy, http://www.nature.org, version saved
by the Internet Archive Wayback Machine on February 8, 2013, http://web.archive.org.
6. Richard C. Haut et al., “Living in Harmony—Gas Production and the Attwater’s Prairie Chicken,”
prepared for presentation at the Society of Petroleum Engineers Annual Technical Conference and
Exhibition, Florence, Italy, September 19–22, 2010, pp. 5, 10; Oil and Gas Lease, Nature Conservancy
of Texas, Inc. to Galveston Bay Resources, Inc., March 11, 1999, South 1,057 Acres; Stephens and
Ottaway, “How a Bid to Save a Species Came to Grief”; personal interview with Aaron Tjelmeland,
April 15, 2013.
7. Janet Wilson, “Wildlife Shares Nest with Profit,” Los Angeles Times, August 20, 2002; Stephens and
Ottaway, “How a Bid to Save a Species Came to Grief.”
8. Ibid.
9. Ibid.
10. Ibid.
11. “Nature Conservancy Changes,” Living on Earth, Public Radio International, June 20, 2003.
12. Personal email communications with Vanessa Martin, associate director of marketing and
communications, Texas chapter, The Nature Conservancy, May 16 and 21 and June 24, 2013.
13. Outside of the original 1999 well and its replacement well drilled on the same pad in 2007, an
additional two wells were drilled under Nature Conservancy leases, both in 2001: a gas well that was
plugged and abandoned in 2004, and another well that turned out to be a dry hole. Haut et al., “Living
in Harmony,” p. 5; personal email communications with Vanessa Martin, April 24 and May 16, 2013.
14. Oil and Gas Lease, Nature Conservancy of Texas, Inc. to Galveston Bay Resources, Inc., pp. 3–5;
Martin email communications, May 21 and June 24, 2013; “Attwater’s Prairie Chicken Background,”
The Nature Conservancy, provided on April 24, 2013, p. 3; personal interview with James Petterson,
July 31, 2014.
15. NOVEMBER 2012: Personal email communication with Mike Morrow, wildlife biologist, Attwater
Prairie Chicken National Wildlife Refuge, April 17, 2013; “NONE THAT WE KNOW ABOUT”:
Tjelmeland interview, April 15, 2013; “BIGGEST” AND THIRTY-FIVE COUNTRIES: D.T. Max,
“Green is Good,” The New Yorker, May 12, 2014; MEMBERS: “About Us: Learn More About the
Nature Conservancy,” Nature Conservancy, http://www.nature.org; ASSETS: “Consolidated Financial
Statements,” Nature Conservancy, June 30, 2013, p. 3; MILLIONS: Stephens and Ottaway, “How a

Bid to Save a Species Came to Grief”; WEBSITE: “Texas City Prairie Preserve,” Nature Conservancy,
http://www.nature.org.
16. DONATIONS FROM SHELL AND BP TO CF, CI, AND TNC, AND FROM AEP TO CF: Christine
MacDonald, Green, Inc.: An Environmental Insider Reveals How a Good Cause Has Gone Bad (Guilford,
CT: Lyons Press, 2008), 25; SUPPORT FROM AEP TO TNC: Ibid., 139; WWF AND SHELL: Alexis
Schwarzenbach, Saving the World’s Wildlife: WWF—The First 50 Years (London: Profile, 2011), 145–
48, 271; “The Gamba Complex—Our Solutions,” World Wildlife Fund Global, http://wwf.panda.org;
WRI AND SHELL FOUNDATION: “WRI’s Strategic Relationships,” World Resources Institute,
http://www.wri.org; CI PARTNERHSIPS: “Corporate Partners,” Conservation International,
http://www.conservation.org; $2 MILLION: Joe Stephens, “Nature Conservancy Faces Potential
Backlash from Ties with BP,” Washington Post, May 24, 2010; FOOTNOTE: “Undercover with
Conservation International” (video), Don’t Panic, May 8, 2011; Tom Zeller Jr., “Conservation
International Duped by Militant Greenwash Pitch,” Huffington Post, May 17, 2011; Peter Seligmann,
“Partnerships for the Planet: Why We Must Engage Corporations,” Huffington Post, May 19, 2011.
17. John F. Smith Jr., a former CEO and later chairman of General Motors, and E. Linn Draper Jr., formerly
the CEO and chairman of American Electric Power, both served on The Nature Conservancy’s board
of directors: “Past Directors of The Nature Conservancy,” Nature Conservancy, http://www.nature.org;
David B. Ottaway and Joe Stephens, “Nonprofit Land Bank Amasses Billions,” Washington Post, May
4, 2003. BUSINESS COUNCIL: “Working with Companies: Business Council,” Nature Conservancy,
http://www.nature.org; BOARD OF DIRECTORS: “About Us: Board of Directors,” Nature
Conservancy, http://www.nature.org.
18. “Consolidated Financial Statements,” Nature Conservancy, June 30, 2012, pp. 20-21; “Consolidated
Financial Statements,” Nature Conservancy, June 30, 2013, p. 21; Naomi Klein, “Time for Big Green
to Go Fossil Free,” The Nation, May 1, 2013; FOOTNOTE: Mark Tercek email communication to
senior managers, August 19, 2013.
19. Shell has agreed to pay out $15.5 million to settle a case involving such human rights abuse claims,
although it continues to deny wrongdoing, as does Chevron: Jad Mouawad, “Shell to Pay $15.5
Million to Settle Nigerian Case,” New York Times, June 8, 2009; Michelle Kinman and Antonia
Juhasz, ed., “The True Cost of Chevron: An Alternative Annual Report,” True Cost of Chevron
network, May 2011, p. 46; “Bowoto v. Chevron,” EarthRights International,
http://www.earthrights.org. SIERRA CLUB: Bryan Walsh, “How the Sierra Club Took Millions from
the Natural Gas Industry—and Why They Stopped,” Time, February 2, 2012; Michael Brune, “The
Sierra Club and Natural Gas,” Sierra Club, February 2, 2012; personal email communication with Bob
Sipchen, communications director, Sierra Club, April 21, 2014.
20. 2012 Form 990, Attachment 8, Ford Foundation, pp. 44, 48, 53.
21. In the lead-up to congressional battles over carbon trading in the U.S., philanthropists including the
ClimateWorks Foundation distributed hundreds of millions of dollars to a number of environmental
groups after raising money from sources such as the Hewlett Foundation and the Packard Foundation.
Reportedly, this helped to create an atmosphere of pressure to focus on or to avoid distracting from the
cap-and-trade fight: Petra Bartosiewicz and Marissa Miley, “The Too Polite Revolution: Why the
Recent Campaign to Pass Comprehensive Climate Legislation in the United States Failed,” paper
presented at symposium on the Politics of America’s Fight Against Global Warming, Harvard
University, February 2013, p. 30; personal interview with Jigar Shah, September 9, 2013. DESIGN TO
WIN: “Design to Win: Philanthropy’s Role in the Fight Against Global Warming,” California
Environmental Associates, August 2007, pp. 14–18, 24, 42.
22. Robert Brulle, “Environmentalisms in the United States,” in Environmental Movements Around the
World, Vol. 1, ed. Timothy Doyle and Sherilyn MacGregor (Santa Barbara: Praeger, 2013), 174.
23. Global Carbon Project emissions data, 2013 Budget v2.4 (July 2014), available at http://cdiac.ornl.gov;
“Caring for Climate Hosts Inaugural Business Forum to Co-Create Climate Change Solutions,” United
Nations Global Compact, press release, November 19, 2013; Rachel Tansey, “The COP19 Guide to

Corporate Lobbying: Climate Crooks and the Polish Government’s Partners in Crime,” Corporate
Europe Observatory and Transnational Institute, October 2013.
24. “Partners for COP19,” United Nations Climate Change Conference, COP19/CMP9 Warsaw 2013,
Media Centre, press release, September 17, 2013; “Who We Are,” PGE Group, Investor Relations,
http://www.gkpge.pl/en; “International Coal & Climate Summit 2013,” World Coal Association,
http://www.worldcoal.org; Adam Vaughan and John Vidal, “UN Climate Chief Says Coal Can Be Part
of Global Warming Solution,” Guardian, November 18, 2013; David Jolly, “Top U.N. Official Warns
of Coal Risks,” New York Times, November 18, 2013.
25. Pooley, The Climate War, 59; “25 Years After DDT Ban, Bald Eagles, Osprey Numbers Soar,”
Environmental Defense Fund, press release, June 13, 1997.
26. Ramachandra Guha and Joan Martínez Alier, Varieties of Environmentalism (Abingdon, Oxon:
Earthscan, 2006), 3–21; Joan Martínez Alier, The Environmentalism of the Poor: A Study of Ecological
Conflicts and Valuation (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2002).
27. Mark Dowie, Losing Ground: American Environmentalism at the Close of the Twentieth Century
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996), 33, 39.
28. Lou Cannon, Governor Reagan: His Rise to Power (Cambridge, MA: PublicAffairs, 2003), 177–78;
“Watt Says Foes Want Centralization of Power,” Associated Press, January 21, 1983.
29. Riley E. Dunlap et al., “Politics and Environment in America: Partisan and Ideological Cleavages in
Public Support for Environmentalism,” Environmental Politics 10 (2001): 31; “Endangered Earth, Planet
of the Year,” Time, January 2, 1989; FOOTNOTE: Dunlap et al., “Politics and Environment in
America,” 31.
30. “Principles of Environmental Justice,” First National People of Color Environmental Leadership
Summit, October 1991, http://www.ejnet.org.
31. Gus Speth, “American Environmentalism at the Crossroads,” speech, Climate Ethics and Climate
Equity series, Wayne Morse Center for Law and Politics, University of Oregon, April 5, 2011.
32. “Corporations,” Conservation Fund, http://www.conservationfund.org; “History,” Conservation
International, http://www.conservation.org, version saved by the Internet Archive Wayback Machine
on December 3, 2013, http:// web.archive.org.
33. Ottaway and Stephens, “Nonprofit Land Bank Amasses Billions”; Joe Stephens and David B. Ottaway,
“Nonprofit Sells Scenic Acreage to Allies at a Loss,” Washington Post, May 6, 2003; Monte Burke,
“Eco-Pragmatists; The Nature Conservancy Gets in Bed with Developers, Loggers and Oil Drillers,”
Forbes, September 3, 2001.
34. “Environmentalists Disrupt Financial Districts in NYC, San Francisco,” Associated Press, April 23,
1990; Donatella Lorch, “Protesters on the Environment Tie Up Wall Street,” New York Times, April
24, 1990; Martin Mittelstaedt, “Protesters to Tackle Wall Street,” Globe and Mail, April 23, 1990.
35. Elliot Diringer, “Environmental Demonstrations Take Violent Turn,” San Francisco Chronicle, April 24,
1990; “Environmentalists Disrupt Financial Districts in NYC, San Francisco.”
36. Pooley, The Climate War, 69.
37. Fred Krupp, “New Environmentalism Factors in Economic Needs,” Wall Street Journal, November 20,
1986; “Partnerships: The Key to Lasting Solutions,” How We Work, Environmental Defense Fund,
http://www.edf.org.
38. Michael Kranish, “The Politics of Pollution,” Boston Globe Magazine, February 8, 1998; Pooley, The
Climate War, 74–81; personal interview with Laurie Williams and Allan Zabel, lawyers, Environmental
Protection Agency, interviewed in their personal capacity, April 4, 2014.
39. “Fred Krupp,” Our People, Environmental Defense Fund, http://www.edf.org; “Our Finances,” About
Us, Environmental Defense Fund, http://www.edf.org; Pooley, The Climate War, 98; FOOTNOTE: Ken
Wells, “Tree-Hitter Tercek Channels Goldman at Nature Conservancy,” Bloomberg, May 31, 2012.
40.
$65
MILLION:
“2011
Grant
Report,”
Walton
Family
Foundation,
http://www.waltonfamilyfoundation.org; “2011 Annual Report”, Environmental Defense Fund, p. 31,
http://www.edf.org. DONATION POLICY: “Corporate Donation Policy,” How We Work,

Environmental Defense Fund, http://www.edf.org; “WOULD UNDERMINE”: Eric Pooley,
“Viewpoint: Naomi Klein’s Criticism of Environmental Groups Missed the Mark,” Climate Progress,
September 11, 2013; Michelle Harvey, “Working Toward Sustainability with Walmart,”
Environmental Defense Fund, September 18, 2013; FAMILY-CONTROLLED: 2012 Form 990,
Attachment 14, Walton Family Foundation, https://www.guidestar.org; NO DIRECT DONATIONS:
Stephanie Clifford, “Unexpected Ally Helps WalMart Cut Waste,” New York Times, April 13, 2012;
SAM RAWLINGS WALTON: “Our Board of Trustees,” About Us, Environmental Defense Fund,
http://www .edf.org.
41. Stacy Mitchell, “Walmart Heirs Quietly Fund Walmart’s Environmental Allies,” Grist, May 10, 2012;
Stacy Mitchell, “Walmart’s Assault on the Climate,” Institute for Local Self-Reliance, November
2013.
42. “2011 Grant Report,” Walton Family Foundation, http://www.waltonfamilyfoundation.org; “Walmart
Announces Goal to Eliminate 20 Million Metric Tons of Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Global
Supply Chain,” Environmental Defense Fund, press release, February 25, 2010; Daniel Zwerdling and
Margot Williams, “Is Sustainable-Labeled Seafood Really Sustainable?,” NPR, February 11, 2013;
“Walmart Adds a New Facet to Its Fine Jewelry Lines: Traceability,” Walmart, July 15, 2008,
http://news.walmart.com; Mitchell, “Walmart Heirs Quietly Fund Walmart’s Environmental Allies.”
43. McIntosh, “Where Now ‘Hell and High Water’?”
44. FOOTNOTE: “Universal Pictures, Illumination Entertainment and the Nature Conservancy Launch
‘The Lorax Speaks’ Environmental Action Campaign on Facebook,” Universal Pictures, press release,
February 17, 2012; Raymund Flandez, “Nature Conservancy Faces Flap Over Fundraising Deal to
Promote Swimsuit Issues,” Chronicle of Philanthropy, March 6, 2012; “Sports Illustrated Swimsuit
Inspired Swimwear, Surfboards and Prints on Gilt.com,” Inside Sports Illustrated, January 30, 2012.
45. George Marshall, “Can This Really Save the Planet?” Guardian, September 12, 2007.
46. Edward Roby, Untitled, UPI, June 11, 1981; Joseph Romm, “Why Natural Gas Is a Bridge to
Nowhere,” Energy Collective, January 24, 2012; Martha M. Hamilton, “Natural Gas, Nuclear Backers
See Opportunity in ‘Greenhouse’ Concern,” Washington Post, July 22, 1988.
47. “Nation’s Environmental Community Offers ‘Sustainable Energy Blueprint’ to New Administration,”
Blueprint Coalition, press release, November 18, 1992; statement of Patricio Silva, project attorney,
Natural Resources Defense Council, Hearing Before the Subcommittee on Energy and Air Quality,
Committee on Energy and Commerce, United States House of Representatives, 107th Congress,
February 28, 2001.
48. “Golden Rules for a Golden Age of Gas,” World Energy Outlook Special Report, International Energy
Agency, May 29, 2012, pp. 9, 15, http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org; Nidaa Bakhsh and Brian Swint,
“Fracking Spreads Worldwide,” Bloomberg Businessweek, November 14, 2013.
49. Anthony Ingraffea, “Gangplank to a Warm Future,” New York Times, July 28, 2013.
50. “Climate Experts Call for Moratorium on UK Shale Gas Extraction,” University of Manchester, press
release, January 20, 2011; Sandra Steingraber, “A New Environmentalism for an Unfractured Future,”
EcoWatch, June 6, 2014.
51. Personal interview with Mark Z. Jacobson, April 7, 2014.
52. “Companies We Work With: JPMorgan Chase & Co.,” Nature Conservancy, http://www.na ture.org;
Marc Gunther, “Interview: Matthew Arnold on Steering Sustainability at JP Morgan,” Guardian,
February 18, 2013; Ann Chambers Noble, “The Jonah Field and Pinedale Anticline: A Natural-Gas
Success Story,” WyoHistory.org (Wyoming State Historical Society), http://www .wyohistory.org;
Bryan Schutt, et al., “For Veteran Producing States, Hydraulic Fracturing Concerns Limited,” SNL
Energy Gas Utility Week, July 11, 2011; “Working with Companies: BP and Development by Design,”
Nature Conservancy, http://www.nature.org.
53. “Strategic Partners,” Center for Sustainable Shale Development, www.sustainableshale.org; J. Mijin
Cha, “Voluntary Standards Don’t Make Fracking Safe,” Huffington Post, March 22, 2013.
54. “Big Green Fracking Machine,” Public Accountability Initiative, June 2013, p. 1; Joyce Gannon,

“Heinz Endowments President’s Departure Leaves Leadership Void,” Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, January
14, 2014; Kevin Begos, “Heinz Endowments Shift on Environmental Grants,” Associated Press, August
4, 2013; personal email communication with Carmen Lee, communications officer, Heinz
Endowments, June 25, 2014.
55. “Environmental Defense Fund Announces Key Grant from Bloomberg Philanthropies,” Environmental
Defense Fund, August 24, 2012; Peter Lattman, “What It Means to Manage the Mayor’s Money,” New
York Times, October 15, 2010; “Company Overview of Willett Advisors LLC,” Capital Markets,
Bloomberg Businessweek, http://investing.businessweek.com; personal email communication with
Bloomberg Philanthropies representative, April 16, 2014.
56. “First Academic Study Released in EDF’s Groundbreaking Methane Emissions Series,” Environmental
Defense Fund, press release, September 16, 2013; Michael Wines, “Gas Leaks in Fracking Disputed in
Study,” New York Times, September 16, 2013; “University of Texas at Austin Study Measures Methane
Emissions Released from Natural Gas Production,” Cockrell School of Engineering, press release,
October 10, 2012; David T. Allen et al., “Measurements of Methane Emissions at Natural Gas
Production Sites in the United States,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110 (2013): 17,
768–773; Robert Howarth, “Re: Allen et al. Paper in the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences,” Cornell University, press release, September 11, 2013.
57. Ibid.; Denver Nicks, “Study: Leaks at Natural Gas Wells Less Than Previously Thought,” Time,
September 17, 2013; Seth Borenstein and Kevin Begos, “Study: Methane Leaks from Gas Drilling Not
Huge,” Associated Press, September 16, 2013; “Fracking Methane Fears Overdone,” The Australian,
September 19, 2013.
58. Lindsay Abrams, “Josh Fox: ‘Democracy Itself Has Become Contaminated,’ ” Salon, August 1, 2013.
59. Pooley, The Climate War, 88–89.
60. William Drozdiak, “Global Warming Talks Collapse,” Washington Post, November 26, 2000; “Special
Report,” International Environment Reporter, February 4, 1998.
61. “The EU Emissions Trading System,” Policies, Climate Action, European Commission,
http://ec.europa.eu; “State and Trends of the Carbon Market 2011,” Environment Department, World
Bank, June 2011, p. 9; personal email communication with Jacob Ipsen Hansen, energy efficiency
consultant, UNEP DTU Partnership, April 15, 2014; email communication with Larry Lohmann,
carbon trading expert, The Corner House.
62. Oscar Reyes, “Future Trends in the African Carbon Market,” in Trusha Reddy, ed., “Carbon Trading in
Africa: A Critical Review,” Institute for Security Studies, Monograph No. 184, November 2011, pp.
21–28; Fidelis Allen, “Niger Delta Oil Flares, Illegal Pollution and Oppression,” in Patrick Bond et al.,
“The CDM Cannot Deliver the Money to Africa: Why the Clean Development Mechanism Won’t
Save the Planet from Climate Change, and How African Civil Society is Resisting,” EJOLT Report
No. 2, December 2012, pp. 57–61; “Green Projects,” Carbon Limits (Nigeria),
http://carbonlimitsngr.com.
63. Elisabeth Rosenthal and Andrew W. Lehren, “Profits on Carbon Credits Drive Output of a Harmful
Gas,” New York Times, August 8, 2012; John McGarrity, “India HFC-23 Emissions May Rise if CDM
Boon Ends—Former Official,” Reuters (Point Carbon), October 31, 2012; “Two Billion Tonne
Climate Bomb: How to Defuse the HFC-23 Problem,” Environmental Investigation Agency, June
2013, p. 5.
64. “CDM Panel Calls for Investigation over Carbon Market Scandal,” CDM Watch and Environmental
Investigation Agency, press release, July 2, 2010, http://eia-global.org.
65. “CDM Projects by Type,” CDM/JI Pipeline Analysis and Database, UNEP DTU partnership, updated
September 1, 2013, http://www.cdmpipeline.org.
66. Rowan Callick, “The Rush Is on for Sky Money,” The Australian, September 5, 2009; “Voices from
Madagascar’s Forests: ‘The Strangers, They’re Selling the Wind,’ ” No REDD in Africa Network,
http://no-redd-africa.org.
67. Ryan Jacobs, “The Forest Mafia: How Scammers Steal Millions Through Carbon Markets,” The

Atlantic, October 11, 2013; Luz Marina Herrera, “Piden Que Defensoría del Pueblo Investigue a
Presunto Estafador de Nacionalidad Australiana,” La Región, April 4, 2011; Chris Lang, “AIDESEP and
COICA Condemn and Reject ‘Carbon Cowboy’ David Nilsson and Demand His Expulsion from
Peru,” REDD-Monitor, May 3, 2011; Chris Lang, “David Nilsson: Carbon Cowboy,” Chris Lang.org,
November 22, 2011, http://chrislang.org; “Perú: Amazónicos exigen ‘REDD+ Indígena’ y rechazan
falsas soluciones al cambio global,” Servindi, May 2, 2011; FOOTNOTE: Patrick Bodenham and Ben
Cubby, “Carbon Cowboys,” Sydney Morning Herald, July 23, 2011; “Record of Proceedings (Hansard),”
48th Parliament of Queensland, December 3, 1996, pp. 4781–83, http://www.parliament.qld.gov.au.
68. Larry Lohmann, “Carbon Trading: A Critical Conversation on Climate Change, Privatisation and
Power,” Development Dialogue no. 48, September 2006, p. 219; Deb Niemeier and Dana Rowan, “From
Kiosks to Megastores: The Evolving Carbon Market,” California Agriculture 63 (2009); Chris Lang,
“How a Forestry Offset Project in Guatemala Allowed Emissions in the USA to Increase,” REDDMonitor, October 9, 2009.
69. The Carbon Rush, directed by Amy Miller (Kinosmith, 2012); Anjali Nayar, “How to Save a Forest,”
Nature 462 (2009): 28.
70. Mark Schapiro, “GM’s Money Trees,” Mother Jones, November/December 2009; “The Carbon Hunters”
(transcript), reported by Mark Schapiro, Frontline/World, PBS, May 11, 2010; Chris Lang, “Uganda:
Notes from a Visit to Mount Elgon,” ChrisLang.org, February 28, 2007, http://chrislang.org.
71. Rosie Wong, “The Oxygen Trade: Leaving Hondurans Gasping for Air,” Foreign Policy in Focus, June
18, 2013; Rosie Wong, “Carbon Blood Money in Honduras,” Foreign Policy in Focus, March 9, 2012.
72. Personal email communication with Chris Lang, September 28, 2013.
73. Bram Büscher, “Nature on the Move: The Value and Circulation of Liquid Nature and the Emergence
of Fictitious Conservation,” New Proposals: Journal of Marxism and Interdisciplinary Inquiry 6, (2013):
20–36; personal email communication with Bram Büscher, April 16, 2014.
74. EUROPEAN CARBON MARKET: Stanley Reed and Mark Scott, “In Europe, Paid Permits for
Pollution Are Fizzling,” New York Times, April 21, 2013; “MEPs’ Move to Fix EU Carbon Market
Praised,” BBC, July 4, 2013; U.K. COAL: “Digest of UK Energy Statistics 2012,” United Kingdom
Department of Energy and Climate Change, press release, July 26, 2012, p. 5; “Digest of UK Energy
Statistics 2013,” United Kingdom Department of Energy and Climate Change, press release, July 25,
2013, p. 6; UN COMMISSIONED REPORT: “Climate Change, Carbon Markets and the CDM: A
Call to Action,” Report of the High Level Panel on the CDM Policy Dialogue, 2012, p. 67; “99
PERCENT”: personal email communication with Oscar Reyes, May 2, 2014; Alessandro Vitelli, “UN
Carbon Plan Won’t Reverse 99% Price Decline, New Energy Says,” Bloomberg, December 12, 2013.
75. Gillian Mohney, “John Kerry Calls Climate Change a ‘Weapon of Mass Destruction,’ ” ABC News,
February 16, 2014.
76. “It Is Time the EU Scraps Its Carbon Emissions Trading System,” Scrap the EU-ETS, press release,
February 18, 2013; “Declaration Signatories,” Scrap the EU-ETS, http://scrap-the-euets.make
noise.org; “Declaration Scrap ETS,” Scrap the EU-ETS, http://scrap-the-euets.makenoise.org.
77. “EU ETS Phase II—The Potential and Scale of Windfall Profits in the Power Sector,” Point Carbon
Advisory Services for WWF, March 2008; Suzanne Goldenberg, “Airlines ‘Made Billions in Windfall
Profits’ from EU Carbon Tax,” Guardian, January 24, 2013.
78. Michael H. Smith, Karlson Hargroves, Cheryl Desha, Cents and Sustainability: Securing Our Common
Future by Decoupling Economic Growth from Environmental Pressures (London: EarthScan, 2010), 211.
79. Pooley, The Climate War, 371, 377.
80. Bartosiewicz and Miley, “The Too Polite Revolution,” p. 26.
81. “Comparison Chart of Waxman-Markey and Kerry-Lieberman,” Center for Climate and Energy
Solutions, http://www.c2es.org; Bartosiewicz and Miley, “The Too Polite Revolution,” p. 20.
82. Johnson, “Duke Energy Quits Scandal-Ridden American Coalition for Clean Coal Electricity”; Jane
Mayer, “Covert Operations,” The New Yorker, August 30, 2010; Ian Urbina, “Beyond Beltway, Health

Debate Turns Hostile,” New York Times, August 7, 2009; Rachel Weiner, “Obama’s NH Town Hall
Brings Out Birthers, Deathers, and More,” Huffington Post, September 13, 2009.
83. MEMBERS DROP OUT: Steven Mufson, “ConocoPhillips, BP and Caterpillar Quit USCAP,”
Washington Post, February 17, 2010; “UNRECOVERABLE”: Statement of Red Cavaney, senior vice
president, government affairs, ConocoPhillips, U.S. Climate Action Partnership: Hearings Before the
Committee on Energy and Commerce, United States House of Representatives, 111th Congress, 5
(2009); ConocoPhillips, 2012 Annual Report, February 19, 2013, p. 20; CONOCOPHILLIPS
WEBSITE: Kate Sheppard, “ConocoPhillips Works to Undermine Climate Bill Despite Pledge to
Support Climate Action,” Grist, August 18, 2009; EMPLOYEES: “ConocoPhillips Intensifies Climate
Focus,” ConocoPhillips, press release, February 16, 2010; “LOWEST-COST OPTION”: Michael
Burnham, “Conoco, BP, Caterpillar Leave Climate Coalition,” New York Times (Greenwire), February
16, 2010.
84. “Representative Barton on Energy Legislation” (video), C-SPAN, May 19, 2009; FOOTNOTE: Session
4: Public Policy Realities (video), 6th International Conference on Climate Change, The Heartland
Institute, June 30, 2011; Chris Horner, “Al Gore’s Inconvenient Enron,” National Review Online, April
28, 2009.
85. John M. Broder and Clifford Krauss, “Advocates of Climate Bill Scale Down Their Goals,” New York
Times, January 26, 2010.
86. Theda Skocpol, “Naming the Problem: What It Will Take to Counter Extremism and Engage
Americans in the Fight Against Global Warming,” paper presented at symposium on the Politics of
America’s Fight Against Global Warming, Harvard University, February 2013, p. 11.
87. “Environmentalist Slams Exxon over EPA” (video), CNN Money, April 5, 2011; Colin Sullivan, “EDF
Chief: ‘Shrillness’ of Greens Contributed to Climate Bill’s Failure in Washington,” New York Times
(Greenwire), April 4, 2011.
88. “Fortune Brainstorm Green 2011,” Fortune Conferences, http://fortuneconferences.com.

CHAPTER 7: NO MESSIAHS
1. This quote appeared in the first edition of Branson’s book, published in 2007. All citations to the book
refer to the updated 2008 version. Richard Branson, Screw It, Let’s Do It: Expanded Edition (New York:
Virgin, 2008), 114.
2. Katherine Bagley and Maria Gallucci, “Bloomberg’s Hidden Legacy: Climate Change and the Future of
New York City, Part 5,” InsideClimate News, November 22, 2013.
3. Branson, Screw It, Let’s Do It, 118.
4. Ibid., 122–24.
5. Ibid., 119, 127.
6. Andrew C. Revkin, “Branson Pledges Billions to Fight Global Warming,” New York Times, September
21, 2006; Marius Benson, “Richard Branson Pledges $3 Billion to Tackle Global Warming,” The World
Today, ABC (Australia), September 22, 2006.
7. Bruce Falconer, “Virgin Airlines: Powered by Pond Scum?” Mother Jones, January 22, 2008; Branson,
Screw It, Let’s Do It, 131.
8. “Virgin Founder Richard Branson Pledges $3 Billion to Fight Global Warming,” Reuters, September
22, 2006; Michael Specter, “Branson’s Luck,” The New Yorker, May 14, 2007.
9. “The Virgin Earth Challenge: Sir Richard Branson and Al Gore Announce a $25 Million Global
Science and Technology Prize,” The Virgin Earth Challenge, Virgin Atlantic, http://www.virgin atlantic.com; “Branson, Gore Announce $25 Million ‘Virgin Earth Challenge,’ ” Environmental Leader,
February 9, 2007; Branson, Screw It, Let’s Do It, 138; “Virgin Offers $25 Million Prize to Defeat Global
Warming,” Virgin Earth Prize, press release, February 9, 2007.
10. Branson, Screw It, Let’s Do It, 140.
11. Joel Kirkland, “Branson’s ‘Carbon War Room’ Puts Industry on Front Line of U.S. Climate Debate,”
ClimateWire, New York Times, April 22, 2010; Rowena Mason, “Sir Richard Branson: The Airline
Owner on His New War,” Telegraph, December 28, 2009.
12. Bryan Walsh, “Global Warming: Why Branson Wants to Step In,” Time, December 31, 2009.
13. Carlo Rotella, “Can Jeremy Grantham Profit from Ecological Mayhem?” New York Times, August 11,
2011; Jeremy Grantham, “The Longest Quarterly Letter Ever,” Quarterly Letter, GMO LLC, February
2012, http://www.capitalinstitute.org; FOOTNOTE: “Grantees,” The Grantham Foundation for the
Protection of the Environment,” http://www.granthamfoundation.org.
14. Whitney Tilson, “Whitney Tilson’s 2007 Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting Notes,” Whitney
Tilson’s Value Investing Website, May 5, 2007, http://www.tilsonfunds.com.
15. “NV Energy to Join MidAmerican Energy Holdings Company,” MidAmerican Energy Holdings
Company, press release, May 19, 2013, http://www.midamerican.com; “Berkshire Hathaway Portfolio
Tracker,” CNBC, http://www.cnbc.com; Nick Zieminski, “Buffett Buying Burlington Rail in His
Biggest Deal,” Reuters, November 3, 2009; Alex Crippen, “CNBC Transcript: Warren Buffett Explains
His Railroad ‘All-In Bet’ on America,” CNBC, November 3, 2009.
16. Keith McCue, “Reinsurance 101,” presentation, RenaissanceRe, 2011; personal interview with Eli
Lehrer, August 20, 2012; Eli Lehrer, “The Beach House Bailout,” Weekly Standard, May 10, 2010.
17. Josh Wingrove, “Meet the U.S. Billionaire Who Wants to Kill the Keystone XL Pipeline,” Globe and
Mail, April 6, 2013; FOOTNOTE: Joe Hagan, “Tom Steyer: An Inconvenient Billionaire,” Men’s
Journal, March 2014; “Unprecedented Measurements Provide Better Understanding of Methane
Emissions During Natural Gas Production,” University of Texas at Austin, press release, September 16,
2013; Tom Steyer and John Podesta, “We Don’t Need More Foreign Oil and Gas,” Wall Street Journal,
January 24, 2012.

18.

“Beyond Coal Campaign,” Philanthropist: Moving Beyond Coal, Mike Bloomberg,
http://www.mikebloomberg.com; “Bloomberg Philanthropies Grant Awarded to Environmental
Defense Fund,” Bloomberg Philanthropies, press release, August 27, 2012; Katherine Bagley and Maria
Gallucci, “Bloomberg’s Hidden Legacy: Climate Change and the Future of New York City, Part 1,”
InsideClimate News, November 18, 2013; FOOTNOTE: Tom Angotti, “Is New York’s Sustainability
Plan Sustainable?” paper presented at Association of Collegiate Schools of Planning and Association
of European Schools of Planning joint conference, July 2008; Michael R. Bloomberg and George P.
Mitchell, “Fracking is Too Important to Foul Up,” Washington Post, August 23, 2012.
19. “Introducing Our Carbon Risk Valuation Tool,” Bloomberg, December 5, 2013; Dawn Lim, “Willett
Advisors Eyes Real Assets for Bloomberg’s Philanthropic Portfolio,” Foundation & Endowment
Intelligence, May 2013.
20. “Risky Business Co-Chair Michael Bloomberg” (video), Next Generation, YouTube, June 23, 2014;
Robert Kopp, et al., “American Climate Prospectus: Economic Risks in the United States, prepared by
Rhodium Group for the Risky Business Project, June 2014; “Secretary-General Appoints Michael
Bloomberg of United States Special Envoy for Cities and Climate Change,” United Nations, press
release, January 31, 2014.
21. Holdings in other major oil and gas companies include Shell, ConocoPhillips, and Chevron, and the
foundation has investments in a large number of other oil and gas exploration, production, services,
and engineering firms, as well as coal, gas, and mining companies: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
Trust, Form 990-PF, Return of Private Foundation, 2012, Attachment C, pp. 1–18, and Attachment
D, pp. 1–15; U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, December 31, 2013, http://www.sec.gov.
22. “ENERGY MIRACLES”: Bill Gates, “Innovating to Zero!” (video), TED, February 2010;
TERRAPOWER: “Chairman of the Board,” http://terrapower.com; Robert A. Guth, “A Window into
the Nuclear Future,” Wall Street Journal, February 28, 2011; CARBON-SUCKING INVESTMENT:
“About CE,” Carbon Engineering, http://carbonengineering.com; MILLIONS OF HIS OWN
MONEY: “Fund for Innovative Climate and Energy Research,” http://dge.stanford.edu; PATENTS:
U.S. Patent 8,702,982, “Water Alteration Sructure and System,” filed January 3, 2008; U.S. Patent
8,685,254, “Water Alteration Structure Applications and Methods,” filed January 3, 2008; U.S. Patent
8,679,331, “Water Alteration Structure Movement Method and System,” filed January 3, 2008; U.S.
Patent 8,348,550, “Water Alteration Structure and System Having Heat Transfer Conduit,” filed May
29, 2009; “WE FOCUS”: Interview with David Leonhardt (transcript), Washington Ideas Forum,
November 14, 2012; “CUTE”: Dave Mosher, “Gates: ‘Cute’ Won’t Solve Planet’s Energy Woes,”
Wired, May 3, 2011; “NON-ECONOMIC”: “Conversation with Bill Gates” (transcript), Charlie Rose
Show, January 30, 2013; 25 PERCENT: “Production: Gross Electricity Production in Germany from
2011 to 2013,” Statistisches Bundesamt, https://www.destatis.de.
23. “Texas Oilman T. Boone Pickens Wants to Supplant Oil with Wind,” USA Today, July 11, 2008; “T.
Boone Pickens TV Commercial” (video), PickensPlan, YouTube, July 7, 2008.
24. Dan Reed, “An Apology to Boone Pickens: Sorry, Your Plan Never Had a Chance,” Energy Viewpoints,
December 9, 2013; Carl Pope, “T. Boone and Me,” Huffington Post, July 3, 2008.
25. Christopher Helman, “T. Boone Reborn,” Forbes, March 31, 2014; Kirsten Korosec, “T. Boone Pickens
Finally Drops the ‘Clean’ from His ‘Clean Energy’ Plan,” MoneyWatch, CBS, May 19, 2011; Fen
Montaigne, “A New Pickens Plan: Good for the U.S. or Just for T. Boone?” Yale Environment 360,
April 11, 2011; “T. Boone Pickens on Why He’s for the Keystone XL Pipeline, Why the Tax Code
Should Be ‘Redone’ and No One Person Is to Blame for Gas Prices,” CNN, April 25, 2012.
26. VIRGIN GREEN FUND: Nicholas Lockley, “Eco-pragmatists,” Private Equity International, November
2007, pp. 76–77; AGROFUEL INVESTMENTS: “Khosla Ventures and Virgin Fuels Invest in Gevo,
Inc.,” Gevo, Inc., press release, July 19, 2007; Kabir Chibber, “How Green Is Richard Branson?” Wired,
August 5, 2009; NOT AN INVESTOR IN BIOFUEL PROJECTS: personal email communication
with Freya Burton, director of European relations, LanzaTech, April 18, 2014; Ross Kelly, “Virgin
Australia Researching Eucalyptus Leaves as Jet Fuel,” Wall Street Journal, July 6, 2011; email

communication, communications manager, Future Farm Industries Cooperative Research Center,
April 29, 2014; “HASN’T”: Branson, Screw It, Let’s Do It, 132; BIOFUELS STALLED: “What
Happened to Biofuels?” The Economist, September 7, 2013; “INCREASINGLY CLEAR”: personal
email communication with Richard Branson, May 6, 2014; FOOTNOTE: National Research Council,
Renewable Fuel Standard: Potential Economic and Environmental Effects of U.S. Biofuel Policy
(Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2011), 130–34.
27. “Our Companies: Gevo,” Virgin Green Fund, version saved by the Internet Archive Wayback Machine
on September 28, 2013, http://web.archive.org; “Our Companies: Seven Seas Water,” Virgin Green
Fund, version saved by the Internet Archive Wayback Machine on April 4, 2014,
http://web.archive.org; “Our Companies: Metrolight,” Virgin Green Fund, version saved by the
Internet Archive Wayback Machine on October 30, 2013, http://web.archive.org; “Our Companies:
GreenRoad,” Virgin Green Fund, version saved by the Internet Archive Wayback Machine on
November 29, 2013, http://web.archive.org; personal interview with Evan Lovell, September 3, 2013.
28. Personal interview with Jigar Shah, September 9, 2013.
29. Chibber, “How Green Is Richard Branson?”
30. Branson took part in Solazyme’s Series D round of financing, during which the company raised about
$50 million from at least 10 investors. The round was led by Morgan Stanley and Braemar Energy
Ventures, which says it typically invests “between $1 million and $10 million in a single round of
financing,” and up to $25 million total. Even if the majority of the Series D funding had come from
Branson (an unlikely scenario), the value of his publicized investments would remain millions short of
$300 million: “Solazyme Announces Series D Financing Round of More Than $50 Million,” Solazyme
Inc., press release, August 9, 2010; “Solazyme Adds Sir Richard Branson as Strategic Investor,”
Solazyme Inc., press release, September 8, 2010; “About Braemar Energy Ventures,” Braemar Energy
Ventures, http://www.braemarenergy.com. “TWO OR THREE HUNDRED MILLION”: “Richard
Branson on Climate Change” (video), The Economist, September 23, 2010; “HUNDREDS OF
MILLIONS”: John Vidal, “Richard Branson Pledges to Turn Caribbean Green,” Observer, February 8,
2014; Lovell interview, September 3, 2013.
31. Branson email communication, May 6, 2014; Irene Klotz, “Profile: Sir Richard Branson, Founder,
Virgin Galactic,” SpaceNews, November 11, 2013; Vidal, “Richard Branson Pledges to Turn Caribbean
Green.”
32. Chibber, “How Green Is Richard Branson?”; Branson email communication, May 6, 2014.
33. Branson, Screw It, Let’s Do It, xi; Dan Reed, “Virgin America Takes Off,” USA Today, August 8, 2007;
personal email communication with Madhu Unnikrishnan, manager of media relations, Virgin
America, September 6, 2013; Victoria Stilwell, “Virgin America Cuts Airbus Order, Delays Jets to
Survive,” Bloomberg, November 16, 2012; Grant Robertson, “Virgin America Sets Course for
Canada,” Globe and Mail, March 19, 2010.
34. “Virgin America Orders 60 New Planes, Celebrates ‘Growing Planes’ with Sweet 60 Fare Sale,” Virgin
America, press release, January 17, 2010.
35. NUMBER OF PEOPLE: “Annual Report 2012,” Virgin Australia Holdings Ltd., p. 2,
http://www.virginaustralia.com; “STIFF COMPETITION”: “Richard Branson Beats off Stiff
Competition for Scottish Airport Links,” Courier, April 9, 2013; NO FARES: Alastair Dalton,
“Virgin’s ‘Zero Fares’ on Scots Routes in BA Battle,” Scotsman, March 18, 2013; “Taxi Fares,”
Transport for London, http://www.tfl.gov.uk; FOOTNOTE: Mark Pilling, “Size Does Matter for Virgin
Boss Branson,” Flight Daily News, July 23, 2002; Peter Pae, “New Airline Begins Service Between Los
Angeles and Australia,” Los Angeles Times, February 28, 2009; Lucy Woods, “5 Virgin Aviation Stunts
by Sir Richard Branson,” Travel Magazine, May 7, 2013.
36. Fleet expansions for Virgin Atlantic and Virgin America were confirmed by media representatives at
both airlines. Virgin Australia’s fleet expansion was estimated using information in the airline’s 2007
annual report, as well as its half-year report for 2014, and includes chartered aircraft and other services.
Additional airlines in which Virgin was temporarily invested, such as Brussels Airlines, Air Asia X,

and Virgin Nigeria (now Air Nigeria) were not included: “Annual Report 2007,” Virgin Blue Holdings
Ltd., p. 3; “2014 Half Year Results” (presentation), Virgin Australia Holdings Ltd., February 28, 2014,
p. 11. Emissions growth was estimated by comparing the combined total emissions of Virgin Atlantic
and Virgin Australia in 2007 to the combined total emissions of the three major Virgin airlines in
2012 (Virgin America began its operations in mid-2007). Virgin Australia’s emissions were reported
for the 2006–7 and 2011–12 fiscal years: “Supply Chain 2013,” Virgin Atlantic Airways Ltd., Carbon
Disclosure Project, p. 8, https://www.cdp.net; “Annual Report 2007,” Virgin Blue Holdings Ltd., p. 5;
“Annual Report 2012,” Virgin Australia Holdings Ltd., p. 29; 2008 and 2012 emissions information
submitted to the Climate Registry, Virgin America Inc., p. 2, https://www.crisreport.org. For Virgin
Australia in 2012–2013, see: “Annual Report 2013,” Virgin Australia Holdings Ltd., p. 32. DIP:
“Sustainability Report: Winter 2011/12,” Virgin Atlantic Airways Ltd., p. 4, http://www.virginatlantic.com.
37. Mazyar Zeinali, “U.S. Domestic Airline Fuel Efficiency Ranking 2010,” International Council on Clean
Transportation, September 2013, http://theicct.org.
38. “Virgin and Brawn Agree Sponsorship to Confirm Branson’s Entry to Formula One,” Guardian, March
28, 2009; Daisy Carrington, “What Does a $250,000 Ticket to Space with Virgin Galactic Actually
Buy You?” CNN, August 16, 2013; Peter Elkind, “Space-Travel Startups Take Off,” Fortune, January
16, 2013; FOOTNOTE: Salvatore Babones, “Virgin Galactic’s Space Tourism Venture for the 1%
Will Warm the Globe for the Rest of Us,” Truthout, August 14, 2012.
39. Chibber, “How Green Is Richard Branson?”
40. Richard Wachman, “Virgin Brands: What Does Richard Branson Really Own?” Observer, January 7,
2012; David Runciman, “The Stuntman,” London Review of Books, March 20, 2014; Heather Burke,
“Bill Gates Tops Forbes List of Billionaires for the 12th Year,” Bloomberg, March 9, 2006; “The
World’s Billionaires: #308 Richard Branson,” Forbes, as of July 2014; Vidal, “Richard Branson Pledges
to Turn Caribbean Green.”
41. Chibber, “How Green is Richard Branson?”
42. James Kanter, “Cash Prize for Environmental Help Goes Unawarded,” New York Times, November 21,
2010; Paul Smalera, “Richard Branson Has Deep-Sea Ambitions, Launches Virgin Oceanic,” Fortune,
April 5, 2011.
43. Kanter, “Cash Prize for Environmental Help Goes Unawarded.”
44. Branson email communication, May 6 2014; Helen Craig, “Virgin Earth Challenge Announces Leading
Organisations,” Virgin Unite, November 2011.
45. Ibid.; “$25 Million Prize Awarded to Green Technology” (video), SWTVChannel, YouTube,
November 3, 2011; “The Finalists,” Virgin Earth Challenge, http://www.virginearth.com; “Biochar: A
Critical Review of Science and Policy,” Biofuelwatch, November 2011.
46. Craig, “Virgin Earth Challenge Announces Leading Organisations”; “Virgin Coming to Global Clean
Energy Congress in Calgary,” Calgary Economic Development, press release, September 9, 2011.
47. Knight’s job as the independent Sustainable Development Advisor for the Virgin Group ended in 2012,
though he is still linked to the Earth Prize: “Management Team,” The Virgin Earth Challenge,
http://www.virginearth.com. OTHER CLIENTS: “My Corporate Expertise,” Dr. Alan Knight,
http://www.dralanknight.com; “PRIVATE ACCESS”: Alan Knight, “Oil Sands Revisited,” Dr. Alan
Knight, November 10, 2011, http://www.dralanknight.com; OSLI: “Contact,” Oil Sands Leadership
Initiative, http://www.osli.ca.
48. Knight, “Oil Sands Revisited”; personal interview with Alan Knight, December 12, 2011.
49. Rebecca Penty, “Calgary Firm a Finalist in Virgin’s $25M Green Technology Challenge,” Calgary
Herald, September 28, 2011; Alan Knight, “Alberta Oil Sands Producers ‘Distracted from Ambition
and Creativity,’ ” Financial Post, November 1, 2011.
50. According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration, proved reserves of crude oil were 26.5
billion barrels in 2012. Estimates for additional, economically recoverable reserves that could be
extracted using current and “next-generation” CO2-EOR technologies have been added to the 2012

baseline: “Crude Oil Proved Reserves,” International Energy Statistics, U.S. Energy Information
Administration; Vello A. Kuuskraa, Tyler Van Leeuwen, and Matt Wallace, “Improving Domestic
Energy Security and Lowering CO2 Emissions with ‘Next Generation’ CO2-Enhanced Oil Recovery
(CO2-EOR),” National Energy Technology Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy, DOE/NETL2011/1504, June 20, 2011, p. 4. “SINGLE LARGEST DETERRENT”: Marc Gunther, “Rethinking
Carbon Dioxide: From a Pollutant to an Asset,” Yale Environment 360, February 23, 2012.
51. Marc Gunther, “Nations Stalled on Climate Action Could ‘Suck It Up,’ ” Bloomberg, June 18, 2012;
Marc Gunther, “The Business of Cooling the Planet,” Fortune, October 7, 2011.
52. Penty, “Calgary Firm a Finalist in Virgin’s $25M Green Technology Challenge”; Robert M. Dilmore,
“An Assessment of Gate-to-Gate Environmental Life Cycle Performance of Water-Alternating-Gas
CO2-Enhanced Oil Recovery in the Permian Basin,” Executive Summary, National Energy
Technology Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy, DOE/NETL-2010/1433, September 30, 2010, p.
1; Paulina Jaramillo, W. Michael Griffin, and Sean T. McCoy, “Life Cycle Inventory of CO2 in an
Enhanced Oil Recovery System,” Environmental Science & Technology 43 (2009): 8027–8032.
53. Marc Gunther, “Direct Air Carbon Capture: Oil’s Answer to Fracking?” GreenBiz.com, March 12,
2012.
54. “NRDC Calls on Major Airlines to Steer Clear of Highly Polluting New Fuel Types,” Natural
Resources Defense Council, press release, January 10, 2008; Liz Barratt-Brown, “NRDC Asks Airlines
to Oppose Dirty Fuels and Cut Global Warming Pollution,” Natural Resources Defense Council,
January 10, 2008; Letter from Peter Lehner, Executive Director of the Natural Resources Defense
Council, to Gerard J. Arpey, Chief Executive Officer of American Airlines, January 9, 2008,
http://docs.nrdc.org.
55. Alan Knight, “Alberta Oil Sands Producers ‘Distracted from Ambition and Creativity,’ ” Financial Post,
November 1, 2011; FOOTNOTE: Brendan May, “Shell Refuses to Save the Arctic, but Its Customers
Still Could,” Business Green, July 24, 2013.
56. Julie Doyle, “Climate Action and Environmental Activism: The Role of Environmental NGOs and
Grassroots Movements in the Global Politics of Climate Change,” in Tammy Boyce and Justin Lewis,
eds., Climate Change and the Media, (New York: Peter Lang, 2009), 103–116; Mark Engler, “The
Climate Justice Movement Breaks Through,” Yes!, December 1, 2009; “Heathrow Northwest Third
Runway Option Short-Listed by Airports Commission,” Heathrow Airport, press release, December
17, 2013.
57. James Sturcke, “Climate Change Bill to Balance Environmental and Energy Concerns, Guardian,
November 15, 2006. George Monbiot, “Preparing for Take-off,” Guardian, December 19, 2006; Dan
Milmo, “Brown Hikes Air Passenger Duty,” Guardian, December 6, 2006; “Euro MPs Push for Air Fuel
Taxes,” BBC News, July 4, 2006.
58. Jean Chemnick, “Climate: Branson Calls Carbon Tax ‘Completely Fair’ but Dodges Question on E.U.
Airline Levy,” E&E News, April 26, 2012; Gwyn Topham, “Virgin Atlantic Planning Heathrow to
Moscow Flights,” Guardian, July 2012; Richard Branson, “Don’t Run Heathrow into the Ground,”
Times (London), June 30, 2008; FOOTNOTE: Roland Gribben, “Sir Richard Branson’s 5bn Heathrow
Offer Rejected,” Telegraph, March 12, 2012.
59. “Branson Criticises Carbon Tax, Backs Biofuels,” PM, ABC (Australia), July 6, 2011; Rowena Mason,
“Sir Richard Branson Warns Green Taxes Threaten to Kill Aviation,” Telegraph, December 16, 2009;
FOOTNOTE: “Behind Branson,” The Economist, February 19, 1998; Juliette Garside, “Richard
Branson Denies Being a Tax Exile,” Guardian, October 13, 2013; Branson, Screw It, Let’s Do It, 113116.
60. Matthew Lynn, “Branson’s Gesture May Not Save Aviation Industry,” Bloomberg, September 26, 2006.
61. “Virgin America Selling Carbon Offsets to Passengers,” Environmental Leader, December 5, 2008; John
Arlidge, “I’m in a Dirty Old Business but I Try,” Sunday Times (London), August 9, 2009.
62. Knight, “Alberta Oil Sands Producers ‘Distracted from Ambition and Creativity.’ ”
63. Karl West, “Virgin Gravy Trains Rolls On,” Sunday Times (London), January 16, 2011; Phillip Inman,

“Privatised Rail Will Remain Gravy Train,” Guardian, July 4, 2011; Richard Branson, “It’s Nonsense
to Suggest Virgin’s Success Has Depended on State Help,” Guardian, November 23, 2011.
64. Gwyn Topham, “Privatised Rail Has Meant ‘Higher Fares, Older Trains and Bigger Taxpayers’ Bill,’ ”
Guardian, June 6, 2013; Adam Whitnall, “Virgin Trains Set for £3.5m Refurbishment—to Remove
Smell from Corridors,” Independent (London), October 6, 2013; Will Dahlgreen, “Nationalise Energy
and Rail Companies, Say Public,” YouGov, November 4, 2013.
65. Penty, “Calgary Firm a Finalist in Virgin’s $25M Green Technology Challenge”; Gunther, “The
Business of Cooling the Planet.”

CHAPTER 8: DIMMING THE SUN
1. Newt Gingrich, “Stop the Green Pig: Defeat the Boxer-Warner-Lieberman Green Pork Bill Capping
American Jobs and Trading America’s Future,” Human Events, June 3, 2008.
2. William James, The Will to Believe: And Other Essays in Popular Philosophy (New York: Longmans
Green, 1907), 54.
3. “Geoengineering the Climate: Science, Governance and Uncertainty,” Royal Society, September 2009,
p. 62; “Solar Radiation Management: the Governance of Research,” Solar Radiation Management
Governance Initiative, convened by the Environmental Defense Fund, the Royal Society, and TWAS,
2011, p. 11.
4. Environmental Defense Fund, “Geoengineering: A ‘Cure’ Worse Than the Disease?” Solutions 41
(Spring 2010): 10–11.
5. EXPERIMENTS: Patrick Martin et al., “Iron Fertilization Enhanced Net Community Production but
not Downward Particle Flux During the Southern Ocean Iron Fertilization Experiment LOHAFEX,”
Global Biogeochemical Cycles (2013): 871–881; “The Haida Salmon Restoration Project: The Story So
Far,” Haida Salmon Restoration Corporation, September 2012; PEER-REVIEWED PAPERS:
GeoLibrary, Oxford Geoengineering Programme, http://www.geoengineer ing.ox.ac.uk; SHIPS AND
PLANES: John Latham et al., “Marine Cloud Brightening,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society A 370 (2012): 4247–4255; HOSES: David Rotman, “A Cheap and Easy Plan to Stop Global
Warming,” MIT Technology Review, February 8, 2013; Daniel Cressey, “Cancelled Project Spurs Debate
over Geoengineering Patents,” Nature 485 (2012): 429.
6. P. J. Crutzen, “Albedo Enhancement by Stratospheric Sulfur Injections: A Contribution to Resolve a
Policy Dilemma?” Climatic Change 77 (2006): 212; Oliver Morton, “Is This What It Takes to Save the
World?” Nature 447 (2007): 132.
7. Ben Kravitz, Douglas G. MacMartin, and Ken Caldeira, “Geoengineering: Whiter Skies?” Geophysical
Research Letters 39 (2012): 1, 3–5; “Geoengineering: A Whiter Sky,” Carnegie Institution for Science,
press release, May 30, 2012.
8. “Solar Radiation Management,” p. 16.
9. Roger Revelle et al., “Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide,” in Restoring the Quality of Our Environment,
Report of the Environmental Pollution Panel, President’s Science Advisory Committee, The White
House, November 1965, Appendix Y4, p. 127.
10. James Rodger Fleming, Fixing the Sky: The Checkered History of Weather and Climate Control (New York:
Columbia University Press, 2010), 165–188.
11. Crutzen, “Albedo Enhancement by Stratospheric Sulfur Injections,” 216.
12. “When Patents Attack!” Planet Money, NPR, July 22, 2011.
13. “The Stratospheric Shield,” Intellectual Ventures, 2009, pp. 3, 15–16; “Solving Global Warming with
Nathan Myhrvold” (transcript), Fareed Zakaria GPS, CNN, December 20, 2009.
14. Steven D. Levitt and Stephen J. Dubner, SuperFreakonomics (New York: HarperCollins, 2009), 194.
15. “A Future Tense Event: Geoengineering,” New America Foundation, http://www.newamerica.net.
16. Eli Kintisch, Hack the Planet: Science’s Best Hope—or Worst Nightmare—for Averting Climate Catastrophe
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2010), 8; personal interview with James Fleming, November 5,
2010.
17. “Inventors,” Intellectual Ventures, http://www.intellectualventures.com.
18. GATES AND FUND: “Fund for Innovative Climate and Energy Research,” Carnegie Institution for
Science, Stanford University, http://dge.stanford.edu; GATES AND CARBON ENGINEERING:
“About CE,” Carbon Engineering, http://carbonengineering.com; GATES AND INTELLECTUAL
VENTURES: Jason Pontin, “Q&A: Bill Gates,” MIT Technology Review, September/October 2010;

PATENTS: U.S. Patent 8,702,982, “Water Alteration Structure and System,” filed January 3, 2008;
U.S. Patent 8,685,254, “Water Alteration Structure Applications and Methods,” filed January 3, 2008;
U.S. Patent 8,679,331, “Water Alteration Structure Movement Method and System,” filed January 3,
2008; U.S. Patent 8,348,550, “Water Alteration Structure and System Having Heat Transfer
Conduit,” filed May 29, 2009; TERRAPOWER: “Nathan Myhrvold, Ph.D.,” TerraPower,
http://terrapower.com; BRANSON: “Stakeholder Partners,” Solar Radiation Management
Governance Initiative, http://www.srmgi.org.
19. Jon Taylor, “Geoengineering—Useful Tool for Tackling Climate Change, or Dangerous Distraction?”
WWF-UK, September 6, 2012, http://blogs.wwf.org.uk.
20. Alan Robock, “20 Reasons Why Geoengineering May Be a Bad Idea,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 64
(2008): 14–18; Clive Hamilton, “The Ethical Foundations of Climate Engineering,” in Climate Change
Geoengineering: Philosophical Perspectives, Legal Issues, and Governance Frameworks, ed. Wil C. G. Burns
and Andrew L. Strauss (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013), 48.
21. Francis Bacon, Bacon’s New Atlantis, ed. A. T. Flux (London: Macmillan, 1911); John Gascoigne,
Science in the Service of Empire: Joseph Banks, the British State and the Uses of Science in the Age of
Revolution (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), 175.
22. Personal email communication with Sallie Chisholm, October 28, 2012.
23. “PRINTING PRESS AND FIRE”: Matthew Herper, “With Vaccines, Bill Gates Changes the World
Again,” Forbes, November 2, 2011; RUSS GEORGE: “Background to the Haida Salmon Restoration
Project,” Haida Salmon Restoration Corporation, October 19, 2012, p. 2; ONE HUNDRED TONS:
“Haida Gwaii Geoengineering, Pt 2,” As It Happens with Carol Off & Jeff Douglas, CBC Radio, October
16, 2012; “THE CHAMPION”: Mark Hume and Ian Bailey, “Businessman Russ George Defends
Experiment Seeding Pacific with Iron Sulphate,” Globe and Mail, October 19, 2012; “PANDORA’S
BOX”: Jonathan Gatehouse, “Plan B for Global Warming,” Maclean’s, April 22, 2009;
“IRRIGATION”: personal interview with David Keith, October 19, 2010.
24. Wendell Berry, The Way of Ignorance: And Other Essays (Emeryville, CA: Shoemaker & Hoard, 2005),
54.
25. Petra Tschakert, “Whose Hands Are Allowed at the Thermostat? Voices from Africa,” presentation at
“The Ethics of Geoengineering: Investigating the Moral Challenges of Solar Radiation Management,”
University of Montana, Missoula, October 18, 2010.
26. Alan Robock, Martin Bunzl, Ben Kravitz, and Georgiy L. Stenchikov, “A Test for Geoengineering?”
Science 327 (2010): 530; Alan Robock, Luke Oman, and Georgiy L. Stenchikov, “Regional Climate
Responses to Geoengineering with Tropical and Arctic SO2 Injections,” Journal of Geophysical Research
113 (2008): D16101.
27. Robock, Bunzl, Kravitz, and Stenchikov, “A Test for Geoengineering?” 530.
28. Martin Bunzl, “Geoengineering Research Reservations,” presentation to the American Association for
the Advancement of Science, February 20, 2010; Fleming, Fixing the Sky, 2.
29. Robock, Oman, and Stenchikov, “Regional Climate Responses to Geoengineering with Tropical and
Arctic SO2 Injections”; K. Niranjan Kumar et al., “On the Observed Variability of Monsoon Droughts
over India,” Weather and Climate Extremes 1 (2013): 42.
30. Numerous papers have reproduced Robock’s results and found that SRM could have other potentially
harmful impacts on the global water cycle and regional precipitation patterns. Notable recent
examples include: Simone Tilmes et al., “The Hydrological Impact of Geoengineering in the
Geoengineering Model Intercomparison Project (GeoMIP),” Journal of Geophysical Research:
Atmospheres 118 (2013): 11,036–11,058; Angus J. Ferraro, Eleanor J. Highwood, and Andrew J.
Charlton-Perez, “Weakened Tropical Circulation and Reduced Precipitation in Response to
Geoengineering,” Environmental Research Letters 9 (2014): 014001. The 2012 study is: H. Schmidt et
al., “Solar Irradiance Reduction to Counteract Radiative Forcing from a Quadrupling of CO2: Climate
Responses Simulated by Four Earth System Models,” Earth System Dynamics 3 (2012): 73. An earlier
study by the U.K. Met Office Hadley Centre had found that brightening clouds off the coast of

southern Africa would cause an even greater, 30 percent reduction in precipitation in the Amazon
that, according to the study press release, “could accelerate die-back of the forest.” See: Andy Jones,
Jim Haywood, and Olivier Boucher, “Climate Impacts of Geoengineering Marine Stratocumulus
Clouds,” Journal of Geophysical Research 114 (2009): D10106; “Geoengineering Could Damage Earth’s
Eco-systems,” UK Met Office, press release, September 8, 2009. The 2013 study is: Jim M. Haywood et
al., “Asymmetric Forcing from Stratospheric Aerosols Impacts Sahelian Rainfall,” Nature Climate
Change 3 (2013): 663.
31. Climate models “appear to underestimate the magnitude of precipitation changes over the 20th
century,” which according to some researchers carries special relevance for the risks of SRM: Gabriele
C. Hegerl and Susan Solomon, “Risks of Climate Engineering,” Science 325 (2009): 955–956.
ARCTIC SEA ICE LOSS AND GLOBAL SEA LEVEL RISE: Julienne Stroeve et al., “Arctic Sea Ice
Decline: Faster than Forecast,” Geophysical Research Letters 34 (2007): L09501; Julienne C. Stroeve et
al., “Trends in Arctic Sea Ice Extent from CMIP5, CMIP3 and Observations,” Geophysical Research
Letters 39 (2012): L16502; Stefan Rahmstorf et al., “Recent Climate Observations Compared to
Projections,” Science 316 (2007): 709; Ian Allison et al., “The Copenhagen Diagnosis, 2009: Updating
the World on the Latest Climate Science,” University of New South Wales Climate Change Research
Centre, 2009, p. 38.
32. Ken Caldeira, “Can Solar Radiation Management Be Tested?” email to the Google Group listserv
“Geoengineering,” September 27, 2010; Levitt and Dubner, SuperFreakonomics, 197.
33. Ibid., 176.
34. Personal interview with Aiguo Dai, June 6, 2012; Kevin E. Trenberth and Aiguo Dai, “Effects of Mount
Pinatubo Volcanic Eruption on the Hydrological Cycle as an Analog of Geoengineering,” Geophysical
Research Letters 34 (2007): L15702; “Climate Change and Variability in Southern Africa: Impacts and
Adaptation Strategies in the Agricultural Sector,” United Nations Environment Programme, 2006, p.
2; Donatella Lorch, “In Southern Africa, Rains’ Return Averts Famine,” New York Times, April 23,
1993; Scott Kraft, “30 Million May Feel Impact of Southern Africa Drought,” Los Angeles Times, May
18, 1992.
35. Dai interview, June 6, 2012; Trenberth and Dai, “Effects of Mount Pinatubo Volcanic Eruption on the
Hydrological Cycle as an Analog of Geoengineering.”
36. Volney’s full name was Constantin-François de Chasseboeuf, count de Volney. “WEAKER THAN
NORMAL”: Personal interview with Alan Robock, October 19, 2010; “ALL HAD PERISHED”:
Constantin-François Volney, Travels Through Syria and Egypt, in the Years 1783, 1784, and 1785, Vol. 1
(London: G. and J. Robinson, 1805), 180-181.
37. John Grattan, Sabina Michnowicz, and Roland Rabartin, “The Long Shadow: Understanding the
Influence of the Laki Fissure Eruption on Human Mortality in Europe,” Living Under the Shadow:
Cultural Impacts of Volcanic Eruptions, ed. John Grattan and Robin Torrence (Walnut Creek, CA: Left
Coast Press, 2010), 156; Clive Oppenheimer, Eruptions That Shook the World (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2011), 293; Rudolf Brázdil et al., “European Floods During the Winter 1783/1784:
Scenarios of an Extreme Event During the ‘Little Ice Age,’ ” Theoretical and Applied Climatology 100
(2010): 179–185; Anja Schmidt et al., “Climatic Impact of the Long-lasting 1783 Laki Eruption:
Inapplicability of Mass-independent Sulfur Isotopic Composition Measurements,” Journal of
Geophysical Research 117 (2012): D23116; Alexandra Witze and Jeff Kanipe, Island on Fire: The
Extraordinary Story of Laki, the Volcano That Turned Eighteenth-century Europe Dark (London: Profile
Books, 2014), 141–45.
38. Luke Oman et al., “High-Latitude Eruptions Cast Shadow over the African Monsoon and the Flow of
the Nile,” Geophysical Research Letters 33 (2006): L18711; Michael Watts, Silent Violence: Food, Famine
and Peasantry in Northern Nigeria (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983), 286, 289–290;
Stephen Devereux, “Famine in the Twentieth Century,” Institute of Development Studies, IDS
Working Paper 105, 2000, pp. 6, 30–31.
39. Oman et al., “High-Latitude Eruptions Cast Shadow over the African Monsoon and the Flow of the

Nile”; personal interview with Alan Robock, May 29, 2012.
40. David Keith, A Case for Climate Engineering (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2013), 10, 54.
41. Trenberth and Dai, “Effects of Mount Pinatubo Volcanic Eruption on the Hydrological Cycle as an
Analog of Geoengineering.”
42. Ed King, “Scientists Warn Earth Cooling Proposals Are No Climate ‘Silver Bullet,’ ” Responding to
Climate Change, July 14, 2013; Haywood et al., “Asymmetric Forcing from Stratospheric Aerosols
Impacts Sahelian Rainfall,” 663–64.
43. “Why We Oppose the Copenhagen Accord,” Pan African Climate Justice Alliance, June 3, 2010;
“Filipina Climate Chief: ‘It Feels Like We Are Negotiating on Who Is to Live and Who Is to Die,’ ”
Democracy Now!, November 20, 2013; Rob Nixon, Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2011).
44. “Bill Gates: Innovating to Zero!” TED Talk, February 12, 2010, http://www.ted.com; Levitt and
Dubner, SuperFreakonomics, 199.
45. Bruno Latour, “Love Your Monsters: Why We Must Care for Our Technologies as We Do Our
Children,” in Love Your Monsters: Postenvironmentalism and the Anthropocene, ed. Michael
Shellenberger and Ted Nordhaus (Oakland: Breakthrough Institute, 2011); Mark Lynas, The God
Species: How the Planet Can Survive the Age of Humans (London: Fourth Estate, 2011).
46. Keith, A Case for Climate Engineering, 111.
47. Italics in original. Ed Ayres, God’s Last Offer (New York: Four Walls Eight Windows, 1999), 195.
48. Levitt and Dubner, SuperFreakonomics, 195; “About CE,” Carbon Engineering, http://carbon
engineering.com; Nathan Vardi, “The Most Important Billionaire In Canada,” Forbes, December 10,
2012.
49. “Policy Implications of Greenhouse Warming: Mitigation, Adaptation, and the Science Base,”
National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, Institute of Medicine, 1992, 458,
472.
50. Dan Fagin, “Tinkering with the Environment,” Newsday, April 13, 1992.
51. Jason J. Blackstock et al., “Climate Engineering Responses to Climate Emergencies,” Novim, 2009, pp.
i–ii, 30.
52. “Factsheet: American Enterprise Institute,” ExxonSecrets.org, http://www.exxonsecrets.org; Robert J.
Brulle, “Institutionalizing Delay: Foundation Funding and the Creation of U.S. Climate Change
Counter-Movement Organizations,” Climatic Change, December 21, 2013, p. 8; 2008 Annual Report,
American Enterprise Institute, pp. 2, 10; Lee Lane, “Plan B: Climate Engineering to Cope with Global
Warming,” The Milken Institute Review, Third Quarter 2010, p. 53.
53. Juliet Eilperin, “AEI Critiques of Warming Questioned,” Washington Post, February 5, 2007; “Factsheet:
American Enterprise Institute,” ExxonSecrets.org; Kenneth Green, “Bright Idea? CFL Bulbs Have
Issues of Their Own,” Journal Gazette (Fort Wayne, Indiana), January 28, 2011.
54. Rob Hopkins, “An Interview with Kevin Anderson: ‘Rapid and Deep Emissions Reductions May Not
Be Easy, but 4°C to 6°C Will Be Much Worse,’ ” Transition Culture, November 2, 2012,
http://transitionculture.org.
55. “A Debate on Geoengineering: Vandana Shiva vs. Gwynne Dyer,” Democracy Now!, July 8, 2010.
56. Jeremy Lovell, “Branson Offers $25 mln Global Warming Prize,” Reuters, February 9, 2007.
57. Barbara Ward, Spaceship Earth (New York: Columbia University Press, 1966), 15; FOOTNOTE: Robert
Poole, Earthrise: How Man First Saw the Earth (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008), 92–93; Al
Reinert, “The Blue Marble Shot: Our First Complete Photograph of Earth,” The Atlantic, April 12,
2011; Andrew Chaikin, “The Last Men on the Moon,” Popular Science, September 1994; Eugene
Cernan and Don Davis, The Last Man on the Moon (New York: St. Martin’s, 1999), 324.
58. Kurt Vonnegut Jr., “Excelsior! We’re Going to the Moon! Excelsior!” New York Times Magazine, July
13, 1969, SM10.
59. Poole, Earthrise, 144–145, 162; Peder Anker, “The Ecological Colonization of Space,” Environmental
History 10 (2005): 249–254; Andrew G. Kirk, Counterculture Green: The Whole Earth Catalog and

American Environmentalism (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2007), 170–172; Stewart Brand,
Whole Earth Discipline: Why Dense Cities, Nuclear Power, Transgenic Crops, Restored Wildlands, and
Geoengineering Are Necessary (New York: Penguin, 2009).
60. Leonard David, “People to Become Martians This Century?” NBC News, June 25, 2007.
61. “Richard Branson on Space Travel: ‘I’m Determined to Start a Population on Mars,’ ” CBS This
Morning, September 18, 2012; “Branson’s Invasion of Mars,” New York Post, September 20, 2012;
“Branson: Armstrong ‘Extraordinary Individual’ ” (video), Sky News, August 26, 2012.
62. The three Virgin-branded airlines together emitted roughly 8.8 million metric tons of CO2 in 2011,
greater than the nearly 8 million metric tons emitted by Honduras that year: “Sustainability Report:
Autumn 2012,” Virgin Atlantic Airways Ltd., p. 11; “Annual Report 2011,” Virgin Blue Holdings
Ltd., p. 28; 2011 emissions information submitted to the Climate Registry, Virgin America, Inc., p. 2,
https://www.crisreport.org; “International Energy Statistics,” U.S. Energy Information Administration,
http://www.eia.gov.
63. Kenneth Brower, “The Danger of Cosmic Genius,” The Atlantic, October 27, 2010.
64. Christopher Borick and Barry Rabe, “Americans Cool on Geoengineering Approaches to Addressing
Climate Change,” Brookings Institution, Issues in Governance Studies No. 46, May 2012, p. 3-4;
Malcolm J. Wright, Damon A. H. Teagle, and Pamela M. Feetham, “A Quantitative Evaluation of the
Public Response to Climate Engineering,” Nature Climate Change 4 (2014): 106–110; “Climate
Engineering—What Do the Public Think?” Massey University, press release, January 13, 2014.

PART III: STARTING ANYWAY
1. Arundhati Roy, “The Trickledown Revolution,” Outlook, September 20, 2010.
2. Translation provided by Mitchell Anderson, field consultant at Amazon Watch. Gerald Amos, Greg
Brown, and Twyla Roscovich, “Coastal First Nations from BC Travel to Witness the Gulf Oil Spill”
(video), 2010.

CHAPTER 9: BLOCKADIA
1. “United Nations Conference on Environment and Development: Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development,” International Legal Materials 31 (1992): 879, http://www.un.org.
2. Harold L. Ickes, The Secret Diary of Harold L. Ickes: The First Thousand Days, 1933–1936 (New York:
Simon & Schuster, 1953), 646.
3. Scott Parkin, “Harnessing Rebel Energy: Making Green a Threat Again,” CounterPunch, January 18–20,
2013.
4. “Greece Sees Gold Boom, but at a Price,” New York Times, January 13, 2013; Patrick Forward, David J.
F. Smith, and Antony Francis, Skouries Cu/Au Project, Greece, NI 43-101 Technical Report, European
Goldfields, July 14, 2011, p. 96; “Skouries,” Eldorado Gold Corp., http://www.eldoradogold.com; Costas
Kantouris, “Greek Gold Mine Savior to Some, Curse to Others,” Associated Press, January 11, 2013.
5. Personal interview with Theodoros Karyotis, Greek political activist and writer, January 16, 2014.
6. Deepa Babington, “Insight: Gold Mine Stirs Hope and Anger in Shattered Greece,” Reuters, January
13, 2014; Alkman Granitsas, “Greece to Approve Gold Project,” Wall Street Journal, February 21, 2013;
Jonathan Stearns, “Mountain of Gold Sparks Battles in Greek Recovery Test,” Bloomberg, April 9,
2013.
7. Karyotis interview, January 16, 2014.
8. Nick Meynen, “A Canadian Company, the Police in Greece and Democracy in the Country That
Invented It,” EJOLT, June 13, 2013; “A Law Unto Themselves: A Culture of Abuse and Impunity in
the Greek Police,” Amnesty International, 2014, p. 11; Karyotis interview, January 16, 2014.
9. Luiza Ilie, “Romanian Farmers Choose Subsistence over Shale Gas,” Reuters, October 27, 2013.
10. “Romania Riot Police Clear Shale Gas Protesters,” Agence France-Presse, December 2, 2013; Alex
Summerchild, “Pungesti, Romania: People Versus Chevron and Riot Police,” The Ecologist, December
12, 2013; Antoine Simon and David Heller, “From the Frontline of Anti-Shale Gas Struggles:
Solidarity with Pungesti,” Friends of the Earth Europe, December 7, 2013, https://www.foeeurope.org;
Razvan Chiruta and Petrica Rachita, “Goal of Chevron Scandal in Vaslui County: Church Wants
Land Leased to US Company Back,” Romania Libera, October 18, 2013.
11. “First Nations Chief Issues Eviction Notice to SWN Resources,” CBC News, October 1, 2013; “SWN
Resources Wraps Up Shale Gas Testing in New Brunswick,” CBC News, December 6, 2013; Daniel
Schwartz and Mark Gollom, “N.B. Fracking Protests and the Fight for Aboriginal Rights,” CBC News,
October 21, 2013.
12. “Shale Gas Clash: Explosives, Firearms, Seized in Rexton,” CBC News, October 18, 2013; “First
Nations Clash with Police at Anti-Fracking Protest,” Al Jazeera, October 17, 2013; “RCMP Says
Firearms, Improvised Explosives Seized at New Brunswick Protest,” Canadian Press, October 18, 2013;
Gloria Galloway and Jane Taber, “Native Shale-Gas Protest Erupts in Violence,” Globe and Mail,
October 18, 2013; “Police Cars Ablaze: Social Media Captures Scene of Violent New Brunswick
Protest,” Globe and Mail, October 17, 2013.
13. William Shakespeare, King Henry IV: Part 1, in The Arden Shakespeare, ed. David Scott Kastan
(London: Thompson Learning, 2002), 246; James Ball, “EDF Drops Lawsuit Against Environmental
Activists After Backlash,” Guardian, March 13, 2013.
14. John Vidal, “Russian Military Storm Greenpeace Arctic Oil Protest Ship,” Guardian, September 19,
2013; “Greenpeace Activists Being Given Russian Exit Visas After Amnesty,” UPI, December 26,
2013.
15. David Pierson, “Coal Mining in China’s Inner Mongolia Fuel Tensions,” Los Angeles Times, June 2,
2011; Jonathan Watts, “Herder’s Death Deepens Tensions in Inner Mongolia,” Guardian, May 27,
2011.

16. “About,” Front Line Action on Coal, http://frontlineaction.wordpress.com; Oliver Laughland, “Maules
Creek Coal Mine Divides Local Families and Communities,” Guardian, April 9, 2014; “Maules Creek
Coal Project Environmental Assessment,” Section 7: Impacts, Management and Mitigation,
Whitehaven Coal Limited, Hansen Bailey, July 2011, pp. 90–91; Ian Lowe, “Maules Creek Proposed
Coal Mine: Greenhouse Gas Emissions,” submission to the Maules Creek Community Council, 2012,
http://www.maulescreek.org; “Quarterly Update of Australia’s National Greenhouse Gas Inventory:
December 2013,” Australia’s National Greenhouse Accounts, Department of the Environment,
Australian Government, 2014, p. 6.
17. “Dredging, Dumping and the Great Barrier Reef,” Australian Marine Conservation Society, May 2014,
p. 3.
18. “Final Environmental Impact Statement for the Keystone XL Project,” U.S. Department of State,
August 2011, Table 3.13.1-4: Reported Incidents for Existing Keystone Oil Pipeline, section 3.13, pp.
11–14; Nathan Vanderklippe, “Oil Spills Intensify Focus on New Pipeline Proposals,” Globe and Mail,
May 9, 2011; Carrie Tait, “Pump Station Spill Shuts Keystone Pipeline,” Globe and Mail, May 31,
2011; Art Hovey, “TransCanada Cleaning Up Spill at N.D. Pump Station,” Lincoln Journal Star
(Nebraska), May 10, 2011.
19. Jamie Henn, “40,000+ Join ‘Forward on Climate” Rally in Washington, DC,” Huffington Post,
February 17, 2013; personal email communications with Ramsey Sprague, Tar Sands Blockade, January
22–23, 2014.
20. “Oil Sands Export Ban: BC First Nations Unite to Declare Province-Wide Opposition to Crude Oil
Pipeline,” Yinka Dene Alliance, press release, December 1, 2011.
21. Ian Ewing, “Pipe Piling Up,” CIM Magazine, October 2013; Shawn McCarthy, “Keystone Pipeline
Approval ‘Complete No-Brainer,’ Harper Says,” Globe and Mail, September 21, 2011.
22. Ossie Michelin, “Amanda Polchies, the Woman in Iconic Photo, Says Image Represents ‘Wisp of
Hope,’ ” APTN, October 24, 2013; “Greek Granny Goads Riot Police at Gold Mining Protest with
Wartime Song,” (video) Keep Talking Greece, March 8, 2013; David Herron, “Government Still
Ensuring Hydraulic Fracturing Happens in Pungesti, Romania, Despite Protests by Villagers,” The
Long Tail Pipe, January 5, 2014.
23. FOOTNOTE: Maxime Combes, “Let’s Frackdown the Fracking Companies,” in Leah Temper, et al.,
“Towards a Post-Oil Civilization: Yasunization and Other Initiatives to Leave Fossil Fuels in the Soil,”
EJOLT Report No. 6, May 2013, p. 92.
24. Esperanza Martínez, “The Yasuní—ITT Initiative from a Political Economy and Political Ecology
Perspective,” in Temper et al., “Towards a Post-Oil Civilization,” p. 11; KC Golden, “The Keystone
Principle,” Getting a GRIP on Climate Solutions, February 15, 2013.
25. “Chop Fine: The Human Rights Impact of Local Government Corruption and Mismanagement in
Rivers State, Nigeria,” Human Rights Watch, January 2007, p. 16; “Niger Delta Human Development
Report,” United Nations Development Programme, 2006, p. 76; Adam Nossiter, “Far from Gulf, a
Spill Scourge 5 Decades Old,” New York Times, June 16, 2010; Christian Purefoy, “Nigerians Angry at
Oil Pollution Double Standards,” CNN, June 30, 2010.
26. Nigeria flared about 515 billion cubic feet (14.6 billion cubic meters) of natural gas in 2011, according
to satellite data from the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; assuming 127
kilowatt hours per Mcf of natural gas, following the U.S. Energy Information Administration, this
could theoretically produce nearly three times as much electricity as Nigeria consumed in 2011 (which
was about 23.1 billion kWh). Roughly half of Nigerians do not currently have electricity access. Also
according to EIA data, CO2 emissions from gas flaring in Nigeria totaled about 31.1 million metric
tons in 2011, just over 40 percent of Nigeria’s total emissions from energy consumption that year. For
data sources, see: “Estimated Flared Volumes from Satellite Data, 2007–2011,” World Bank, Global
Gas Flaring Reduction, http://web.worldbank.org; “Frequently Asked Questions: How Much Coal,
Natural Gas, or Petroleum is Used to Generate a Kilowatthour of Electricity?” U.S. Energy
Information, U.S. Department of Energy, http://www.eia.gov; “International Energy Statistics,” U.S.

Energy Information Administration, U.S. Department of Energy, http://www.eia.gov. DELTA
COMMUNITIES LACK: Paul Francis, Deirdre Lapin, and Paula Rossiasco, “Niger Delta: A Social
and Conflict Analysis for Change,” Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, 2011, p. 10;
Richard Essein, “Unemployment Highest in Niger Delta,” Daily Times Nigeria, March 30, 2011;
“Communities Not Criminals: Illegal Oil Refining in the Niger Delta,” Stakeholder Democracy
Network, October 2013, p. 4.
27. Jedrzej George Frynas, “Political Instability and Business: Focus on Shell in Nigeria,” Third World
Quarterly 19 (1998): 463; Alan Detheridge and Noble Pepple (Shell), “A Response to Frynas,” Third
World Quarterly 3 (1998): 481-482.
28. Note that after Shell pulled out, pipelines crossing Ogoni territory from other wells remained active.
Godwin Uyi Ojo, “Nigeria, Three Complementary Viewpoints on the Niger Delta,” in Temper et al.,
“Towards a Post-Oil Civilization,” pp. 39–40; “Nigeria Ogoniland Oil Cleanup ‘Could Take 30
Years,’ ” BBC News, August 4, 2011; Carley Petesch, “Shell Niger Delta Oil Spill: Company to
Negotiate Compensation and Cleanup with Nigerians,” Associated Press, September 9, 2013; Eghosa
E. Osaghae, “The Ogoni Uprising: Oil Politics, Minority Agitation and the Future of the Nigerian
State,” African Affairs 94 (1995): 325–344.
29. Osuoka interview, January 10, 2014; Ojo in Temper et al., “Towards a Post-Oil Civilization,” p. 40.
30. Elisha Bala-Gbogbo, “Nigeria Says Revenue Gap May Reach as Much as $12 Billion,” Bloomberg,
November 1, 2013; Ed Pilkington, “14 Years After Ken Saro-Wiwa’s Death, Family Points Finger at
Shell in Court,” Guardian, May 26, 2009; Frank Aigbogun, “It Took Five to Hang Saro-Wiwa,”
Associated Press, November 13, 1995; Andrew Rowell and Stephen Kretzmann, “The Ogoni
Struggle,” report, Project Underground, Berkeley, California, 1996.
31. Bronwen Manby, “The Price of Oil: Corporate Responsibility and Human Rights Violations in
Nigeria’s Oil Producing Communities,” Human Rights Watch, HRW Index No. 1-56432-225-4,
January 1999, pp. 123–26.
32. “The Kaiama Declaration,” United Ijaw, 1998, http://www.unitedijaw.com.
33. Ibid.
34. Personal interview with Isaac Osuoka, January 10, 2014.
35. Isaac Osuoka, “Operation Climate Change,” in Climate Change: Who’s Carrying the Burden? The Chilly
Climates of the Global Environmental Dilemma, ed. L. Anders Sandberg and Tor Sandberg (Ottawa: The
Canadian Center for Policy Alternatives, 2010), 166.
36. Bronwen Manby, “Nigeria: Crackdown in the Niger Delta,” Human Rights Watch, Vol. 11, No. 2 (A),
May 1999, pp. 2, 11, 13–17.
37. Ojo in Temper et al., “Towards a Post-Oil Civilization,” p. 44.
38. Paul M. Barrett, “Ecuadorian Court Cuts Chevron’s Pollution Bill in Half,” Bloomberg Businessweek,
November 13, 2013; “Supreme Court will hear Chevron appeal in Ecuador environmental damages
case,” The Canadian Press, April 3, 2014.
39. Bob Deans, “Big Coal, Cold Cash, and the GOP,” OnEarth, February 22, 2012.
40. Clifford Krauss, “Shale Boom in Texas Could Increase U.S. Oil Output,” New York Times, May 27,
2011.
41. Brian Milner, “ ‘Saudi America’ Heads for Energy Independence,” Globe and Mail, March 18, 2012;
“Moving Crude Oil by Rail,” Association of American Railroads, December 2013; Clifford Krauss and
Jad Mouawad, “Accidents Surge as Oil Industry Takes the Train,” New York Times, January 25, 2014;
“Kim Mackrael, “How Bakken Crude Moved from North Dakota to Lac-Mégantic,” Globe and Mail,
July 8, 2014; Jim Monk, “Former Gov. Sinner Proposes National Rail Safety Discussion,” KFGO
(North Dakota), January 7, 2014.
42. Nathan Vanderklippe and Shawn McCarthy, “Without Keystone XL, Oil Sands Face Choke Point,”
Globe and Mail, June 8, 2011.
43. “Energy: The Pros and Cons of Shale Gas Drilling,” 60 Minutes, CBS, November 14, 2010.
44. “Glenn Beck—Bernanke Confused, a Coming Caliphate and Rick Santorum,” Glenn Beck, June 23,

2011; Suzanne Goldenberg, “Fracking Hell: What It’s Really Like to Live Next to a Shale Gas Well,”
Guardian, December 13, 2013; Russell Gold and Tom McGinty, “Energy Boom Puts Wells in
America’s Backyards,” Wall Street Journal, October 25, 2013.
45. Kim Cornelissen, “Shale Gas and Quebecers: The Broken Bridge Towards Renewable Sources of
Energy,” in Temper et al., “Towards a Post-Oil Civilization,” p. 100; Emily Gosden, “Half of Britain to
Be Offered for Shale Gas Drilling as Fracking Areas Face 50 Trucks Passing Each Day,” Telegraph,
December 17, 2013; Damian Carrington, “Fracking Can Take Place in ‘Desolate’ North-East England,
Tory Peer Says,” Guardian, July 30, 2013.
46. David Mildenberg and Jim Efstathiou Jr., “Ranchers Tell Keystone: Not Under My Backyard,”
Bloomberg Businessweek, March 8, 2012; Goldenberg, “Fracking Hell.”
47. Daniel Gilbert, “Exxon CEO Joins Suit Citing Fracking Concerns,” Wall Street Journal, February 20,
2014; “Polis Welcomes ExxonMobil CEO into ‘Exclusive’ Group of People Whose Neighborhood Has
Been Fracked,” Congressman Jared Polis, press release, February 21, 2014.
48. Thomas Paine, Rights of Man, Common Sense, and Other Political Writings, ed. Mark Philp (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1998), 25.
49. Nick Engelfried, “The Extraction Backlash—How Fossil Fuel Companies Are Aiding Their Own
Demise,” Waging Nonviolence, November 22, 2013.
50. Mark Dowie, Losing Ground: American Environmentalism at the Close of the Twentieth Century
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996), 125.
51. “Americans, Gulf Residents and the Oil Spill,” poll, CBS News/New York Times, June 21, 2010; Bruce
Alpert, “Obama Administration ‘Cannot Support’ Bill Increasing Offshore Revenue Sharing,” TimesPicayune, July 23, 2013; Annie Snider and Nick Juliano, “Will Landrieu’s Rise Give New Life to
Revenue Sharing?” E&E Daily, February 25, 2014; “The Damage for Gulf Coast Residents: Economic,
Environmental, Emotional,” poll, ABC News/Washington Post, July 14, 2010.
52. “Current High Volume Horizontal Hydraulic Fracturing Drilling Bans and Moratoria in NY State,”
FracTracker.org, http://www.fractracker.org.
53. “Minisink Compressor Project: Environmental Assessment,” Federal Energy Regulatory Commission,
March 2012; Mary Esch, “NY Town of 9/11 Workers Wages Gas Pipeline Fight,” Associated Press,
February 14, 2013; “Blow-Down Events at Minisink Compressor Frighten Un-Notified Residents,”
Stop the Minisink Compressor Station and Minisink Residents for Environmental Preservation and
Safety, March 11, 2013, http://www.stopmcs.org.
54. Maxime Combes, “Let’s Frackdown the Fracking Companies,” in Temper et al., “Towards a Post-Oil
Civilization,” p. 91, 97.
55. Vince Devlin, “Proposed Big Rigs 9 Feet Longer than Howard Hughes’ Spruce Goose,” Missoulian,
November 13, 2010; “747-8: Airplane Characteristics for Airport Planning,” Boeing, December 2012,
p. 7; “Vertical Clearance,” Federal Highway Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation,
http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov.
56. Personal interview with Marty Cobenais, October 17, 2010.
57. Betsy Z. Russell, “Judge Halts Megaloads on Highway 12 in Idaho,” Spokesman-Review (Spokane),
September 13, 2013; personal interview with Alexis Bonogofsky, October 21, 2010.
58. Marc Dadigan, “Umatilla Tribe Battles Mega-Loads Headed for Alberta Oil Sands,” Indian Country
Today Media Network, December 11, 2013.
59. Lesley Fleischman et al. “Ripe for Retirement: An Economic Analysis of the U.S. Coal Fleet,” The
Electricity Journal 26 (2013): 51–63; Michael Klare, “Let Them Eat Carbon: Like Big Tobacco, Big
Energy Targets the Developing World for Future Profits,” TomDispatch, May 27, 2014.
60. KC Golden, “Live on Stage in the Great Northwest: King Coal’s Tragic Puppet Show, Part 1,” Getting
a GRIP on Climate Solutions, March 4, 2013.
61. Michelle Kinman and Antonia Juhasz, ed., “The True Cost of Chevron: An Alternative Annual
Report,” True Cost of Chevron network, May 2011, pp. 13–14; “Contra Costa County Asthma
Profile,” California Breathing, http://www.californiabreathing.org; Jeremy Miller, “The Bay Area

Chevron Explosion Shows Gaps in Refinery Safety,” High Country News, September 3, 2012; Robert
Rogers, “Chevron Refinery Fire One Year Later: Fallout, Impact Show No Sign of Warning,” Contra
Costa Times, August 10, 2013.
62. David R. Baker, “Judge Deals Setback to Chevron Refinery Plan,” San Francisco Chronicle, June 9, 2009;
Katherine Tam, “Court Rules Richmond Refinery Plan Is Inadequate,” Contra Costa Times, April 26,
2010; “Chevron Refinery Expansion at Richmond, CA Halted,” EarthJustice, press release, July 2,
2009.
63. Personal interview with Melina Laboucan-Massimo, July 5, 2013.
64. Hannibal Rhoades, “ ‘We Draw the Line’: Coal-Impacted Lummi Nation and Northern Cheyenne
Unite in Solidarity,” IC Magazine, October 9, 2013.
65. “Jonathan Chait, “The Keystone Fight Is a Huge Environmentalist Mistake,” New York Magazine,
October 30, 2013; Joe Nocera, “How Not to Fix Climate Change,” New York Times, February 18, 2013;
Joe Nocera, “A Scientist’s Misguided Crusade,” New York Times, March 4, 2013.
66. Jad Mouawad, “U.S. Orders Tests on Rail Shipments,” New York Times, February 25, 2014; Jad
Mouawad, “Trailing Canada, U.S. Starts a Push for Safer Oil Shipping,” New York Times, April 24,
2014; Curtis Tate, “Regulators Take Voluntary Route on Tank Car Rules,” McClatchy Newspapers,
May 7, 2014.
67. There is evidence suggesting that dilbit can be more corrosive than other crudes under certain
conditions, particularly at high temperatures, but the matter has been contested in recent years. There
is also evidence that dilbit may be more likely to cause other kinds of pipeline failure, such as cracking.
Anthony Swift, Susan Casey-Lefkowitz, and Elizabeth Shope, “Tar Sands Pipelines Safety Risks,”
Natural Resources Defense Council, 2011, p. 3.
68. Vivian Luk, “Diluted Bitumen Sinks When Mixed with Sediments, Federal Report Says,” Globe and
Mail, January 14, 2014; “Properties, Composition and Marine Spill Behaviour, Fate and Transport of
Two Diluted Bitumen Products from the Canadian Oil Sands,” Federal Government Technical
Report, Government of Canada, November 30, 2013.
69. FOOTNOTE: Bob Weber, “Syncrude Guilty in Death of 1,600 Ducks in Toxic Tailings Pond,” The
Canadian Press, June 25, 2010; Syncrude, Suncor Cleared After Duck Death Investigation,” CBC
News, October 4, 2012; Colleen Cassady St. Clair, Thomas Habib, and Bryon Shore, “Spatial and
Temporal Correlates of Mass Bird Mortality in Oil Sands Tailings Ponds,” report prepared from
Alberta Environment, November 10, 2011, pp. 17–18.
70. Although there is year-to-year fluctuation based on the size of reserves, the value of the oil sands has
risen in line with the industry’s expansion, from C$19 billion in 1990 to C$460 billion in 2010:
“Energy,” Canada Year Book 2012, Statistics Canada, http://www.statcan.gc.ca. Bill Donahue was not
an author of the study he commented on: “Oilsands Study Confirms Tailings Found in Groundwater,
River,” CBC News, February 20, 2014; Richard A. Frank et al., “Profiling Oil Sands Mixtures from
Industrial Developments and Natural Groundwaters for Source Identification,” Environmental Science
& Technology 48 (2014): 2660–70. DIFFERENT CASE: Mike De Souza, “Scientists Discouraged from
Commenting on Oilsands Contaminant Study,” Postmedia News, November 4, 2012.
71. Florence Loyle, “Doctor Cleared over Suggested Link Between Cancer, Oilsands,” Edmonton Journal,
November 7, 2009; Vincent McDermott, “Fort Chipewyan Cancer Study Set to Begin,” Fort
McMurray Today, February 20, 2013; Michael Toledano, “We Interviewed Dr. John O’Connor, One of
the First Tar Sands Whistleblowers,” Vice, March 3, 2014.
72. Peter Moskowitz, “Report Finds Doctors Reluctant to Link Oil Sands with Health Issues,” Al Jazeera
America, January 20, 2014; Mike De Souza, “Scientist Speaks Out After Finding ‘Record’ Ozone Hole
over Canadian Arctic,” Postmedia News, October 21, 2011.
73. Mike De Souza, “Federal Budget Cuts Undermine Environment Canada’s Mandate to Enforce Clean
Air Regulations: Emails,” Postmedia News, March 17, 2013; “Silence of the Labs,” The Fifth Estate,
CBC News, January 10, 2014.
74. FOOTNOTE: Abha Parajulee and Frank Wania, “Evaluating Officially Reported Polycyclic Aromatic

Hydrocarbon Emissions in the Athabasca Oil Sands Region with a Multimedia Fate Model,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 (2014): 3348; “Oil Sands Pollution Two to Three
Times Higher than Thought,” Agence France-Presse, February 3, 2014.
75. “Regulation of Hydraulic Fracturing Under the Safe Drinking Water Act,” Environmental Protection
Agency, http://water.epa.gov; Mary Tiemann and Adam Vann, “Hydraulic Fracturing and Safe
Drinking Water Act Regulatory Issues,” Congressional Research Service, Report R41760, January 10,
2013; Lisa Song, “Secrecy Loophole Could Still Weaken BLM’s Tougher Fracking Regs,”
InsideClimate News, February 15, 2012.
76. Robert B. Jackson et al., “Increased Stray Gas Abundance in a Subset of Drinking Water Wells Near
Marcellus Shale Gas Extraction,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110 (2013): 1125011255; Mark Drajem, “Duke Fracking Tests Reveal Dangers Driller’s Data Missed,” Bloomberg, January
9, 2014.
77. Cliff Frohlich, “Two-Year Survey Comparing Earthquake Activity and Injection Well Locations in the
Barnett Shale, Texas,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 (2012): 13934–13938.
78. Ibid.; Won-Young Kim, “Induced Seismicity Associated with Fluid Injection into a Deep Well in
Youngstown, Ohio,” Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth 118 (2013): 3506–3518; Charles Q.
Choi, “Fracking Practice to Blame for Ohio Earthquakes,” LiveScience, September 4, 2013; Nicholas J.
van der Elst et al., “Enhanced Remote Earthquake Triggering at Fluid-Injection Sites in the
Midwestern United States,” Science 341 (2013): 164–167; Sharon Begley, “Distant Seismic Activity
Can Trigger Quakes at ‘Fracking’ Sites,” Reuters, July 11, 2013.
79. “Report Regarding the Causes of the April 20, 2010 Macondo Well Blowout,” U.S. Department of the
Interior, Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement, September 14, 2011, p.
191; “Deep Water: The Gulf Oil Disaster and the Future of Offshore Drilling,” National Commission
on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling, January 2011, p. 125; Joel Achenbach,
“BP’s Cost Cuts Contributed to Oil Spill Disaster, Federal Probe Finds,” Washington Post, September
14, 2011.
80. Elizabeth McGowan and Lisa Song, “The Dilbit Disaster: Inside The Biggest Oil Spill You’ve Never
Heard Of, Part 1,” InsideClimate News, June 26, 2012.
81. Ibid.; Charles Rusnell, “Enbridge Staff Ignored Warnings in Kalamazoo River Spill,” CBC News, June
22, 2012; “Oil Cleanup Continues on Kalamazoo River,” U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, June
2013.
82. In explaining his previous denials, Daniel appears to have been trying to argue that because the diluted
bitumen traveling in Enbridge’s pipeline had been extracted with newer “in situ” steam injection
technology, rather than mined, it would not qualify as tar sands oil: Todd Heywood, “Enbridge CEO
Downplays Long-Term Effects of Spill,” Michigan Messenger, August 12, 2010. MORE THAN A
WEEK: McGowan and Song, “The Dilbit Disaster”; DANIEL: Kari Lyderson, “Michigan Oil Spill
Increases Concern over Tar Sands Pipelines,” OnEarth, August 6, 2010; Kari Lyderson, “Michigan Oil
Spill: The Tar Sands Name Game (and Why It Matters),” OnEarth, August 12, 2010.
83. Cobenais interview, October 17, 2010.
84. Dan Joling, “Shell Oil-Drilling Ship Runs Aground on Alaska’s Sitkalidak Island,” Associated Press,
January 1, 2013; Rachel D’Oro, “Nobel Discoverer, Shell Oil Drilling Vessel, Shows No Signs of
Damage, Coast Guard Claims,” Associated Press, July 15, 2012; John Ryan, “Sea Trial Leaves Shell’s
Arctic Oil-Spill Gear ‘Crushed Like a Beer Can,’ ” KUOW.org, November 30, 2012.
85. Mike Soraghan, “Oil Spills: U.S. Well Sites in 2012 Discharged More Than Valdez,” EnergyWire,
Monday, July 8, 2013; Dan Frosch and Janet Roberts, “Pipeline Spills Put Safeguards Under Scrutiny,”
New York Times, September 9, 2011.
86. Jim Paulin and Carey Restino, “Shell Rig Grounds off Kodiak,” Bristol Bay Times, January 4, 2013.
87. “SINGLE ENGINEER”: Bruce Campbell, “Lac-Mégantic: Time for an Independent Inquiry,” Toronto
Star, February 27, 2014; UNTIL THE 1980s: personal interview with Ron Kaminkow, general
secretary, Railroad Workers United, January 29, 2014; “CUTTING”: Julian Sher, “Lac Megantic:

Railway’s History of Cost-Cutting,” Toronto Star, July 11, 2013; “OFTEN DON’T TEST”: Grant
Robertson, “Fiery North Dakota Train Derailment Fuels Oil-Shipping Fears,” Globe and Mail,
December 30, 2013; NORTH DAKOTA: Daniella Silva, “Mile-Long Train Carrying Crude Oil
Derails, Explodes in North Dakota,” NBC News, December 30, 2013; NEW BRUNSWICK: Solarina
Ho, “Train Carrying Oil Derails, Catches Fire in New Brunswick, Canada,” Reuters, January 8, 2014;
VIRGINIA: Selam Gebrekidan, “CSX Train Carrying Oil Derails in Virginia in Fiery Blast,” Reuters,
April 30, 2014.
88. Charlie Savage, “Sex, Drug Use and Graft Cited in Interior Department,” New York Times, September
10, 2008.
89. “Americans Less Likely to Say 18 of 19 Industries Are Honest and Trustworthy This Year,” Harris
Interactive, December 12, 2013; Jeffrey Jones, “U.S. Images of Banking, Real Estate Making
Comeback,” Gallup, August 23, 2013; André Turcotte, Michal C. Moore, and Jennifer Winter,
“Energy Literacy in Canada,” School of Public Policy SPP Research Papers, Vol. 5, No. 31, October
2012; “How Companies Influence Our Society: Citizens’ View,” TNS Political and Social, European
Commission, Flash Eurobarometer 363, April 2013, Q3, p. 25.
90. Sandra Steingraber, “It’s Alive! In Defense of Underground Organisms,” Orion Magazine, January/
February 2012, p. 15.
91. Wendell E. Berry, “It All Turns on Affection,” Jefferson Lecture in the Humanities, National
Endowment for the Humantities, 2012, http://www.neh.gov.
CHAPTER 10: LOVE WILL SAVE THIS PLACE
1. Rachel Carson, “The Real World Around Us,” speech to Theta Sigma Phi, Columbus, Ohio, 1954, in
Lost Woods: The Discovered Writing of Rachel Carson, ed. Linda Lear (Boston: Beacon Press, 1998), 163.
2. Paige Lavender and Corbin Hiar, “Blair Mountain: Protesters March to Save Historic Battlefield,”
Huffington Post, June 10, 2011.
3. The largest class of tanker that Northern Gateway plans to use in BC waters has a maximum capacity of
2.2 million barrels of oil, about 74 percent more than the 1,264,155 barrels carried by the Exxon Valdez:
“Section 3.9: Ship Specifications,” TERMPOL Surveys and Studies, Northern Gateway Partnership
Inc., Enbridge Northern Gateway Project, January 20, 2010, pp. 2–7; “Oil Spill Facts: Questions and
Answers,” Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustee Council, http://www.evostc.state.ak.us.
4. Jess Housty, “Transformations,” Coast, April 1, 2013.
5. “Protesters Blamed for Cancelled Pipeline Hearing,” CTV News Vancouver, April 2, 2012.
6. Personal email communication with Tyler McCreary, PhD candidate, York University, January 30,
2014.
7. Sheri Young, letter to the Heiltsuk Tribal Council, Heiltsuk Hereditary Chiefs and Heiltsuk Economic
Development Corporation on behalf of the Enbridge Northern Gateway Project Joint Review Panel,
April 2, 2012; Housty, “Transformations”; Alexis Stoymenoff, “Enbridge Northern Gateway Protest in
Bella Bella Was ‘Absolutely Peaceful,’ ” Vancouver Observer, April 2, 2012.
8. Housty, “Transformations”; Kai Nagata, “Enbridge Misses Heiltsuk Pipeline Hearings,” The Tyee, July
27, 2012; FOOTNOTE: Ibid.
9. Jess Housty, “At the JRP Final Hearings,” Coast, June 20, 2013.
10. Personal interview with Melachrini Liakou, May 31, 2013.
11. Personal interview with Alexis Bonogofsky, March 27, 2013.
12. Andrew Nikiforuk, Tar Sands: Dirty Oil and the Future of a Continent (Vancouver: Greystone, 2010), 44.
13. Personal interview with Jeff King, June 23, 2011.
14. Luiza Ilie, “Romanian Farmers Choose Subsistence over Shale Gas,” Reuters, October 27, 2013.
15. “Oil Sands Export Ban: BC First Nations Unite to Declare Province-Wide Opposition to Crude Oil
Pipeline and Tanker Expansion,” Yinka Dene Alliance, press release, December 1, 2011; “First Nations
Gain Powerful New Allies in Fight Against Enbridge Northern Gateway Pipeline, Tankers,” Yinka
Dene Alliance, press release, December 5, 2013; author’s original reporting, December 1, 2011.

16. “Read the Declaration,” Save the Fraser Declaration, Gathering of Nations, savethefraser.ca.
17. Sheila Leggett, Kenneth Bateman, and Hans Matthews, “Report of the Joint Review Panel for the
Enbridge Northern Gateway Project,” Volume 2, National Energy Board, 2013, pp. 222, 271.
18. “White House Could Cast Decisive Vote to Permit 20,000 Fracking Wells in Delaware River Basin,”
Democracy Now!, November 11, 2011; “Natural Gas Development Regulations,” Delaware River
Basin Commission, November 8, 2011, p. 19.
19. “High Plains Aquifer Water Quality Currently Acceptable but Human Activities Could Limit Future
Use,” U.S. Department of the Interior U.S. Geological Survey, press release, July 16, 2009; “Ogallala
Aquifer Initiative,” Natural Resources Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov.
20. 2.3 BARRELS: “Oil Sands Water Use” (2013 data), Oil Sands Information Portal, Government of
Alberta, http://osip.alberta.ca; CONVENTIONAL CRUDE: “Growth in the Canadian Oil Sands:
Finding the New Balance,” IHS Cambridge Energy Research Associates, 2009, pp. III–7; REQUIRES
MORE WATER: Trisha A. Smrecak, “Understanding Drilling Technology,” Marcellus Shale no. 6,
Paleontological Research Institution, January 2012, p. 3; “70 TO 300 TIMES”: Seth B. Shonkoff,
“Public Health Dimensions of Horizontal Hydraulic Fracturing: Knowledge, Obstacles, Tactics, and
Opportunities,” 11th Hour Project, Schmidt Family Foundation, April 18, 2012, http://www.psr.org;
280 BILLION: Elizabeth Ridlington and John Rumpler, “Fracking by the Numbers: Key Impacts of
Dirty Drilling at the State and National Level,” Environment America, October 2013, p. 4.
http://www.environmentamerica.org; “ENOUGH TO FLOOD”: Suzanne Goldenberg, “Fracking
Produces Annual Toxic Water Enough to Flood Washington DC,” Guardian, October 4, 2013.
21. Monika Freyman, “Hydraulic Fracturing and Water Stress: Water Demand by the Numbers,” Ceres,
February 2014, pp. 49–50, 59–63; David Smith, “Proposed Fracking in South Africa Beauty Spot
Blasted,” Guardian, August 23, 2013; “Hydraulic Fracturing and the Karoo,” Shell South Africa, July
2012, http://www.shell.com/zaf.html; “Tampering with the Earth’s Breath” (video), Green
Renaissance, Vimeo, May 11, 2011.
22. Ilie, “Romanian Farmers Choose Subsistence over Shale Gas.”
23. Personal interview with Anni Vassiliou, June 1, 2013.
24. Marion W. Howard, Valeria Pizarro, and June Marie Mow, “Ethnic and Biological Diversity Within the
Seaflower Biosphere Reserve,” International Journal of Island Affairs 13 (2004): 113; “Caribbean
Archipelago Spared from Oil Drilling,” Rainforest Rescue, June 21, 2012, http://www.rainforestrescue.org; FOOTNOTE: “Nicaragua Files New Claim Against Colombia over San Andres,” BBC,
September 16, 2013.
25. “Victories,” Beyond Coal, Sierra Club, http://content.sierraclub.org; Mary Anne Hitt, “Protecting
Americans from Power Plant Pollution,” Sierra Club, September 17, 2013; “Proposed Coal Plant
Tracker,” Beyond Coal, Sierra Club, http://contentsierraclub.org.
26. James E. Casto, “Spokesmen for Coal Blast EPA Regulatory Mandates,” State Journal (West Virginia),
November 15, 2013.
27. Jeremy van Loon, “Canada’s Oil-Sand Fields Need U.S. Workers, Alberta Minister Says,” Bloomberg
News, September 7, 2011; Shawn McCarthy and Richard Blackwell, “Oil Industry Rebuts ‘TrashTalking’ Celebrity Critics,” Globe and Mail, January 15, 2014.
28. T. S. Sudhir, “After Police Firing, Srikakulam Power Plants Under Review,” NDTV.com, July 16, 2010.
29. Barbara Demick, “Residents of Another South China Town Protest Development Plans,” Los Angeles
Times, December 21, 2011; Gillian Wong, “Thousands Protest China Town’s Planned Coal Plant,”
Associated Press, December 20, 2011; Gillian Wong, “Tear Gas Fired at Protesters in China Seaside
Town,” Associated Press, December 24, 2011.
30. Personal interview with Li Bo, January 11, 2014
31. “Beijing’s Air Pollution at Dangerously High Levels,” Associated Press, January 16, 2014; Ma Yue,
“Alarm System to Close Schools in Severe Smog,” Shanghai Daily, January 16, 2014; “Chinese Anger

over Pollution Becomes Main Cause of Social Unrest,” Bloomberg, March 6, 2013, accessed January
29, 2014.
32. Bruce Einhorn, “Why China Is Suddenly Content with 7.5 Percent Growth,” Bloomberg Businessweek,
March 5, 2012; “GDP Growth (Annual %),” World Development Indicators, World Bank,
http://data.worldbank.org; James T. Areddy and Brian Spegele, “China Chases Renewable Energy as
Coast Chokes on Air,” Wall Street Journal, December 6, 2013; Justin Guay, “The Chinese Coal
Bubble,” Huffington Post, May 29, 2013; Katie Hunt, “China Faces Steep Climb to Exploit Its Shale
Riches,” New York Times, September 30, 2013.
33. Christian Lelong et al., “The Window for Thermal Coal Investment Is Closing,” Goldman Sachs, July
24, 2013; Dave Steves, “Goldman Sachs Bails on Coal Export Terminal Investment,” Portland Tribune,
January 8, 2014.
34. “Shale Gas: Member States Need Robust Rules on Fracking, Say MEPs,” European Parliament, press
release, November 21, 2012.
35. Andrea Schmidt, “Heirs of Anti-Apartheid Movement Rise Up,” Al Jazeera, December 15, 2013.
36. Naomi Klein, “Time for Big Green to Go Fossil Free,” The Nation, May 1, 2013; “Commitments,” Fossil
Free, 350.org, http://gofossilfree.org; “Stanford to Divest from Coal Companies,” Stanford University,
press release, May 6, 2014.
37. “Harvard University Endowment Earns 11.3% Return for Fiscal Year,” Harvard Gazette, September 24,
2013; Andrea Schmidt, “Heirs of Anti-Apartheid Movement Rise Up,” Al Jazeera, December 15,
2013; Mark Brooks, “Banking on Divestment,” Alternatives Journal, November 2013.
38. Mark Brownstein, “Why EDF Is Working on Natural Gas,” Environmental Defense Fund, September
10, 2012.
39. FOOTNOTE: Letter to Fred Krupp from Civil Society Institute, et al., May 22, 2013,
http://www.civilsocietyinstitute.org.
40. Ben Casselman, “Sierra Club’s Pro-Gas Dilemma,” Wall Street Journal, December 22, 2009; Bryan
Walsh, “How the Sierra Club Took Millions from the Natural Gas Industry—and Why They
Stopped,” Time, February 2, 2012; Dave Michaels, “Natural Gas Industry Seeks Greater Role for Power
Plants, Vehicles,” Dallas Morning News, September 18, 2009; Sandra Steingraber, “Breaking Up with
the Sierra Club,” Orion, March 23, 2012.
41. Felicity Barringer, “Answering for Taking a Driller’s Cash,” New York Times, February 13, 2012; “48
Arrested at Keystone Pipeline Protest as Sierra Club Lifts 120-Year Ban on Civil Disobedience,”
Democracy Now!, February 14, 2013; personal email communication with Bob Sipchen,
communications director, Sierra Club, April 21, 2014.
42. Robert Friedman, “Tell Your Alma Mater, Fossil Fuel Divestment Just Went Mainstream,” Natural
Resources Defense Council, April 30, 2014; Klein, “Time for Big Green to Go Fossil Free.”
43. Andrea Vittorio, “Foundations Launch Campaign to Divest from Fossil Fuels,” Bloomberg, January 31,
2014; “Philanthropy,” DivestInvest, http://divestinvest.org.
44. “Global 500,” Fortune, 2013, http://fortune.com; Stanley Reed, “Shell Profit Rises 15% but Disappoints
Investors,” New York Times, January 31, 2013; Stanley Reed, “Shell Says Quarterly Earnings Will Fall
48%,” New York Times, January 17, 2014.
45. Ibid.
46. “Notice of Arbitration Under the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law and Chapter Eleven of the North American Free Trade Agreement,” Lone
Pine Resources Inc., September 6, 2013, pp. 4, 15–18.
47. The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT 1947), World Trade Organization, Article XI: 1,
http://www.wto.org.
48. Personal interview with Ilana Solomon, August 27, 2013.
49. Sarah Anderson and Manuel Perez-Rocha, “Mining for Profits in International Tribunals: Lessons for
the Trans-Pacific Partnership,” Institute for Policy Studies, April 2013, p. 1; Lori Wallach, “Brewing

Storm over ISDR Clouds: Trans-Pacific Partnership Talks—Part I,” Kluwer Arbitration Blog, January
7, 2013.
50. Lindsay Abrams, “The Real Secret to Beating the Koch Brothers: How Our Broken Political System
Can Still Be Won,” Salon, April 29, 2014; personal interview with Marily Papanikolaou, May 29,
2013; Mark Strassman, “Texas Rancher Won’t Budge for Keystone Pipeline,” CBS Evening News,
February 19, 2013; Kim Murphy, “Texas Judge Deals Setback to Opponents of Keystone XL Pipeline,”
Los Angeles Times, August 23, 2012.
51. FOOTNOTE: Suzanne Goldenberg, “Terror Charges Faced by Oklahoma Fossil Fuel Protesters
‘Outrageous,’ ” Guardian, January 10, 2014; Molly Redden, “A Glitter-Covered Banner Got These
Protesters Arrested for Staging a Bioterror Hoax,” Mother Jones, December 17, 2013; personal email
communication with Moriah Stephenson, Great Plains Tar Sands Resistance, January 22, 2014; Will
Potter, “Two Environmentalists Were Charged with ‘Terrorism Hoax’ for Too Much Glitter on Their
Banner,” Vice, December 18, 2013.
52. Adam Federman, “We’re Being Watched: How Corporations and Law Enforcement Are Spying on
Environmentalists,” Earth Island Journal, Summer 2013; Richard Black, “EDF Fined for Spying on
Greenpeace Nuclear Campaign,” BBC, November 10, 2011; Matthew Millar, “Canada’s Top Spy
Watchdog Lobbying for Enbridge Northern Gateway Pipeline,” Vancouver Observer, January 4, 2014;
Jordan Press, “Chuck Strahl Quits Security Intelligence Review Committee,” Postmedia News, January
24, 2014.
53. Greg Weston, “Other Spy Watchdogs Have Ties to Oil Business,” CBC News, January 10, 2014; Press,
“Chuck Strahl Quits Security Intelligence Review Committee.”
54. Leggett, Bateman, and Matthews, “Report of the Joint Review Panel for the Enbridge Northern
Gateway Project,” Volume 2, pp. 209, 384.
55. A more recent poll found that 64 percent of British Columbians were opposed to an increase in tanker
traffic, with four times as many respondents “strongly” opposed than “strongly” in favor: “Oil Tanker
Traffic in B.C.: The B.C. Outlook Omnibus,” Justason Market Intelligence, January 2014, p. 5.
COMMUNITY HEARINGS: Larry Pynn, “Environmentalists Pledge Renewed Fight to Stop
Northern Gateway Pipeline,” Vancouver Sun, December 19, 2013; 80 PERCENT: Scott Simpson,
“Massive Tankers, Crude Oil and Pristine Waters,” Vancouver Sun, June 5, 2010; “SYSTEM IS
BROKEN”: Christopher Walsh, “Northern Gateway Pipeline Approved by National Energy Board,”
Edmonton Beacon, December 19, 2013,
56. Edgardo Lander, “Extractivism and Protest Against It in Latin America,” presented at The Question of
Power: Alternatives for the Energy Sector in Greece and Its European and Global Context, Athens,
Greece, October 2013. George Monbiot, “After Rio, We Know. Governments Have Given Up on the
Planet,” Guardian, June 25, 2012.
57. “Initiative Figures,” Transition Network, updated September 2013, https://www.transitionnet work.org;
Transition Network, “What Is a Transition Initiative?,” http://www.transitionnetwork.org.
58. David Roberts, “Climate-Proofing Cities: Not Something Conservatives Are Going to Be Good At,”
Grist, January 9, 2013.
59. Jesse McKinley, “Fracking Fight Focuses on a New York Town’s Ban,” New York Times, October 23,
2013.
60. “Panel Fails to Listen to British Columbians,” Sierra Club BC, press release, December 19, 2013.
CHAPTER 11: YOU AND WHAT ARMY?
1. Melanie Jae Martin and Jesse Fruhwirth, “Welcome to Blockadia!” YES!, January 11, 2013.
2. Mary Harris Jones, Autobiography of Mother Jones (Mineola, NY: Dover [1925], 2004), 144.
3. Gurston Dacks, “British Columbia After the Delgamuukw Decision: Land Claims and Other Processes,”
Canadian Public Policy 28 (2002): 239–255.
4. “Statement of Claim between Council of the Haida Nation and Guujaaw suing on his own behalf and
on behalf of all members of the Haida Nation (plaintiffs) and Her Majesty the Queen in Right of the

Province of British Columbia and the Attorney General of Canada (defendants),” Action No.
L020662, Vancouver Registry, November 14, 2002, http://www.haidanation.ca; Haida Nation v. British
Columbia (Minister of Forests) 3 SCR 511 (SCC 2004); “Government Must Consult First Nations on
Disputed Land, Top Court Rules,” CBC News, November 18, 2004; personal interview with Arthur
Manuel, August 25, 2004.
5. Personal email communication with Tyler McCreary, PhD candidate, York University, January 30,
2014.
6. Delgamuukw v. British Columbia, [1997], 3 SCR 1010; British Columbia Treaty Commission, “A Lay
Person’s Guide to Delgamuukw v. British Columbia,” November 1999, http://www.bctreaty.net;
Chelsea Vowel, “The Often-Ignored Facts About Elsipogtog,” Toronto Star, November 14, 2013.
7. Melanie G. Wiber and Julia Kennedy, “Impossible Dreams: Reforming Fisheries Management in the
Canadian Maritimes After the Marshall Decision,” in Law and Anthropology: International Yearbook for
Legal Anthropology, Vol. 2, ed. René Kuppe and Richard Potz (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers,
2001), pp. 282–297; William Wicken, “Treaty of Peace and Friendship 1760,” Aboriginal Affairs and
Northern Development Canada, https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca; R. v. Marshall, 3 SCR 456 (1999);
“Supreme Court Decisions: R. v. Marshall,” Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada.
8. “Map of Treaty-Making in Canada,” Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada,
https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca; “Alberta Oil Sands,” Alberta Geological Survey, last modified June 12,
2013, http://www.ags.gov.ab.ca; “Treaty Texts—Treaty No. 6; Copy of Treaty No. 6 Between Her
Majesty the Queen and the Plain and Wood Cree Indians and Other Tribes of Indians at Fort Carlton,
Fort Pitt, and Battle River with Adhesions,” Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada,
https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca.
9. “Emergency Advisory: Mi’kmaq say, ‘We Are Still Here, and SWN Will Not Be Allowed to Frack,’ ”
press release, Halifax Media Co-op, November 3, 2013.
10. Martha Stiegman and Miles Howe, “Summer of Solidarity—A View from the Sacred Fire Encampment
in Elsipogtog,” (video), Halifax Media Co-op, July 3, 2013.
11. “ ‘Crown Land Belongs to the Government, Not to F*cking Natives,’ ” APTN, October 17, 2013;
Martin Lukacs, “New Brunswick Fracking Protests Are the Frontline of a Democratic Fight,” Guardian,
October 21, 2013; Renee Lewis, “Shale Gas Company Loses Bid to Halt Canada Protests,” Al Jazeera
America, October 21, 2013.
12. “FORUMe Research Results,” PowerPoint, MQO Research, presented at FORUMe conference, New
Brunswick, June 2012, http://www.amiando.com; Kevin Bissett, “Alward Facing Opposition from N.B.
Citizens over Fracking,” The Canadian Press, August 30, 2011.
13. Stiegman and Howe, “Summer of Solidarity.”
14. Richard Walker, “In Washington, Demolishing Two Dams So That the Salmon May Go Home,” Indian
Country Today, September 22, 2011; “Press Release 02/26/2014,” Shield the People, press release,
February 26, 2014; “Keystone XL Pipeline Project Compliance Follow-up Review: The Department of
State’s Choice of Environmental Resources Management, Inc., To Assist in Preparing the
Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement,” United States Department of State and the
Broadcasting Board of Governors, February 2014; Jorge Barrera, “Keystone XL ‘Black Snake’ Pipeline
to Face ‘Epic’ Opposition from Native American Alliance,” APTN, January 31, 2014.
15. Steve Quinn, “U.S. Appeals Court Throws Arctic Drilling into Further Doubt,” Reuters, January 23,
2014; Native Village of Point Hope v. Jewell, 44 ELR 20016, No. 12-35287 (9th Cir., 01/22/2014);
“Native and Conservation Groups Voice Opposition to Lease Sale 193 in the Chukchi Sea;” World
Wildlife Fund, press release, February 6, 2008; Faith Gemmill, “Shell Cancels 2014 Arctic Drilling—
Arctic Ocean and Inupiat Rights Reality Check,” Platform, January 30, 2014.
16. Native Village of Point Hope v. Jewell.
17. Terry Macalister, “Shell’s Arctic Drilling Set Back by US Court Ruling,” Guardian, January 23, 2014;
“New Shell CEO Ben van Beurden Sets Agenda for Sharper Performance and Rigorous Capital
Discipline,” Shell, press release, January 30, 2014.

18. Erin Parke, “Gas Hub Future Unclear After Native Title Dispute,” ABC (Australia), February 7, 2013;
“Environmentalists Welcome Scrapping of LNG Project,” ABC (Australia), April 12, 2013; Andrew
Burrell, “Gas Fracking Wars to Open Up on a New Front,” Australian, December 30, 2013; “Native
Title Challenge to Canning Gas Bill,” Australian Associated Press, June 20, 2013; Vicky Validakis,
“Native Title Claimants Want to Ban Mining,” Australian Mining, May 14, 2013.
19. “Ecuador: Inter-American Court Ruling Marks Key Victory for Indigenous People,” Amnesty
International, press release, July 27, 2012.
20. ORIGINAL VOTE: United Nations News Centre, “United Nations Adopts Declaration on Rights of
Indigenous Peoples,” United Nations press release, September 13, 2007; LATER ENDORSEMENTS:
“Indigenous Rights Declaration Endorsed by States,” Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, press release, December 23, 2010; “HAVE THE RIGHT”, “REDRESS”: United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, G.A. Res. 61/295, U.N. Doc. A/Res/61/295
September 13, 2007, pp. 10–11, http://www.un.org; CONSTITUTION (ORIGINAL SPANISH):
República del Bolivia, Constitución de 2009, Capítulo IV: Derechos de las Naciones y Pueblas
Indígena Originario Campesinos, art. 30, sec. 2; CONSTITUTION (ENGLISH TRANSLATION):
Leah Temper et al., “Towards a Post-Oil Civilization: Yasunization and Other Initiatives to Leave
Fossil Fuels in the Soil,” EJOLT Report No. 6, May 2013, p. 71.
21. Alexandra Valencia, “Ecuador Congress Approves Yasuni Basin Oil Drilling in Amazon,” Reuters,
October 3, 2013; Amnesty International, “Annual Report 2013: Bolivia,” May 23, 2013,
http://www.amnesty.org.
22. John Otis, “Chevron vs. Ecuadorean Activists,” Global Post, May 3, 2009.
23. “Beaver Lake Cree Sue over Oil and Gas Dev’t,” Edmonton Journal, May 14, 2008; “Beaver Lake Cree
Nation Draws a Line in the (Oil) Sand,” Beaver Lake Cree Nation, press release, May 14, 2008.
24. Ibid.; Court of the Queen’s Bench, Government of Alberta, 2012 ABQB 195, Memorandum of
Decision of the Honourable Madam Justice B. A. Browne, March 28, 2012.
25. Bob Weber, “Athabasca Chipewyan File Lawsuit Against Shell’s Jackpine Oil Sands Expansion,” The
Canadian Press, January 16, 2014; Chief Allan Adam, “Why I’m on Tour with Neil Young and Diana
Krall,” Huffington Post Canada, January 14, 2014; “Administration and Finance,” Athabasca
Chipewyan First Nation, http://www.acfn.com; “Shell at a Glance,” Shell Global,
http://www.shell.com/global.
26. Emma Gilchrist, “Countdown Is On: British Columbians Anxiously Await Enbridge
Recommendation,” DesmogCanada, December 17, 2013; personal interview with Mike Scott, October
21, 2010.
27. Benjamin Shingler, “Fracking Protest Leads to Bigger Debate over Indigenous Rights in Canada,” Al
Jazeera America, December 10, 2013.
28. OMNIBUS BILLS: Bill C-38, Jobs, Growth and Long-Term Prosperity Act, 41st Parliament, 2012,
S.C. 2012, c. 19, http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca; Bill C-45, Jobs and Growth Act 2012, 41st Parliament,
2012, S.C. 2012, c. 31, http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca; REVIEWS: Tonda MacCharles, “Tories Have
Cancelled Almost 600 Environmental Assessments in Ontario,” Toronto Star, August 29, 2012;
COMMUNITY INPUT: Andrea Janus, “Activists Sue Feds over Rules That ‘Block’ Canadians from
Taking Part in Hearings,” CTV News, August 15, 2013; ACT: Navigable Waters Protection Act,
Revised Statutes of Canada 1985, c. N-22, http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca; FROM PRACTICALLY 100
PERCENT: “Omnibus Bill Changes Anger Water Keepers,” CBC News, October 19, 2012; TO LESS
THAN 1 PERCENT: “Legal Backgrounder: Bill C-45 and the Navigable Waters Protection Act”
(RSC 1985, C N-22), EcoJustice, October 2012; “Hundreds of N.S. Waterways Taken off Protected
List; Nova Scotia First Nation Joins Idle No More Protest,” CBC News, December 27, 2012;
PIPELINES: See amendments 349(5) and 349(9) of Bill C-45, Jobs and Growth Act 2012, 41st
Parliament, 2012, S.C. 2012, c. 31; DOCUMENTS REVEALED: Heather Scoffield, “Documents
Reveal Pipeline Industry Drove Changes to ‘Navigable Waters’ Act,” The Canadian Press, February
20, 2013.

29. “Electoral Results by Party: 41st General Election (2011.05.02),” Parliament of Canada,
http://www.parl.gc.ca; Ian Austen, “Conservatives in Canada Expand Party’s Hold,” New York Times,
May 2, 2011.
30. Julie Gordon and Allison Martell, “Canada Aboriginal Movement Poses New Threat to Miners,”
Reuters, March 17, 2013.
31. Martin Lukacs, “Indigenous Rights Are the Best Defence Against Canada’s Resource Rush,” Guardian,
April 26, 2013.
32. “Neil Young at National Farmers Union Press Conference” (video), YouTube, Thrasher Wheat,
September 9, 2013; Jian Ghomeshi, “Q exclusive: Neil Young Says ‘Canada Trading Integrity for
Money’ ”(video), CBC News, January 13, 2014.
33. Personal interview with Eriel Deranger, communications manager, Athabasca Chipewyan First Nation
January 30, 2014; “Poll: How Do You Feel About Neil Young Attacking the Oilsands?” Edmonton
Journal, January 12, 2014.
34. Ghomeshi, “Q exclusive: Neil Young Says ‘Canada Trading Integrity for Money’ ”; Adam, “Why I’m on
Tour with Neil Young and Diana Krall.”
35. “National Assessment of First Nations Water and Wastewater Systems,” prepared by Neegan Burnside
for Department of Indian and Northern Affairs, Canada, April 2011, 16, http://www.aadncaandc.gc.ca.
36. In 2012, Greenland’s subsidy from Denmark was about 3.6 billion Danish kroner, equal to 31 percent of
its GDP that year. The subsidy was also about 3.6 billion Danish kroner in 2013: “Greenland in
Figures: 2014,” Statistics Greenland, 2014, pp. 7–8; Jan. M. Olsen, “No Economic Independence for
Greenland in Sight,” Associated Press, January 24, 2014; “OUR INDEPENDENCE”: McKenzie Funk,
Windfall: The Booming Business of Global Warming (New York: Penguin, 2014), 78.
37. Angela Sterritt, “Industry and Aboriginal Leaders Examine Benefits of the Oilsands,” CBC News,
January 24, 2014.
38. Personal interview with Phillip Whiteman Jr., October 21, 2010.

CHAPTER 12: SHARING THE SKY
1. Leah Temper, “Sarayaku Wins Case in the Inter-American Court of Human Rights but the Struggle for
Prior Consent Continues,” EJOLT, August 21, 2012.
2. Sivan Kartha, Tom Athanasiou, and Paul Baer, “The North-South Divide, Equity and Development—
The Need for Trust-Building for Emergency Mobilisation,” Development Dialogue no. 61, September
2012, p. 62.
3. According to the U.S. Geological Survey, there are 162 billion short tons of technically recoverable
coal in the Powder River Basin. Using the 2012 total coal consumption figure from the U.S. Energy
Information Administration of 889 million short tons, this resource could last approximately 182 years:
David C. Scott and James A. Luppens, “Assessment of Coal Geology, Resources, and Reserve Base in
the Powder River Basin, Wyoming and Montana,” U.S. Geological Survey, February 26, 2013;
“International Energy Statistics,” U.S. Energy Information Administration, U.S. Department of
Energy, http://www.eia.gov.
4. “Many Stars CTL,” Beyond Coal, Sierra Club, http://content.sierraclub.org; Homepage, Many Stars
Project, http://www.manystarsctl.com/index.html.
5. Personal interview with Mike Scott, October 21, 2010; personal interview with Alexis Bonogofsky,
October 21, 2010.
6. “2013 American Indian Population and Labor Force Report,” U.S. Department of the Interior, Office
of the Secretary, Office of the Assistant Secretary—Indian Affairs, January 2014, p. 47; “Cheyenne
Warriors,” Day One, ABC News, July 6, 1995.
7. Personal interview with Charlene Alden, October 22, 2010.
8. Personal interview with Henry Red Cloud, June 22, 2011.
9. Andreas Malm, “The Origins of Fossil Capital: From Water to Steam in the British Cotton Industry,”
Historical Materialism 21 (2013): 45.
10. Personal interview with Larry Bell, July 1, 2011.
11. Carolyn Merchant, “Environmentalism: From the Control of Nature to Partnership,” Bernard Moses
Lecture, University of California, Berkeley, May 2010.
12. Personal interview with Landon Means, June 24, 2011; personal interview with Jeff King, June 23,
2011.
13. Personal interview with Henry Red Cloud, June 22, 2011; personal interview with Alexis Bonogofsky,
June 22, 2011.
14. Matthew Brown, “Wildfires Ravage Remote Montana Indian Reservation,” Associated Press, August
31, 2012; personal interview with Vanessa Braided Hair, March 27, 2013.
15. Personal interview with Henry Red Cloud, June 24, 2011.
16. Author’s original reporting, March 21, 2013; audio recording, courtesy of Alexis Bonogofsky, January
17, 2013.
17. “Our Work,” Black Mesa Water Coalition, http://www.blackmesawatercoalition.org; “Black Mesa
Water Coalition” (video), Black Mesa Peeps, YouTube, December 19, 2011.
18. Marc Lee, Enbridge Pipe Dreams and Nightmares: The Economic Costs and Benefits of the Proposed Northern
Gateway Pipeline, Vancouver, BC: Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives, March 2012, 4-7
19. Ibid., p. 6.
20. Dan Apfel, “Why Investors Must Do More Than Divest from Fossil Fuels,” The Nation, June 17, 2013
21. Diane Cardwell, “Foundations Band Together to Get Rid of Fossil-Fuel Investments,” New York Times,
January 29, 2014; Brendan Smith, Jeremy Brecher, and Kristen Sheeran, “Where Should the Divestors
Invest?” Common Dreams, May 17, 2014.
22. Ibid.

23. Melanie Wilkinson, “Pipeline Fighters Dedicate Structure on Route,” York News-Times (Nebraska),
September 24, 2013.
24. “Our Mission,” RepowerBalcombe, http://www.repowerbalcombe.com.
25. Personal interview with Bill McKibben, November 5, 2011.
26. Personal email communication with John Jordan, January 13, 2011.
27. Patrick Quinn, “After Devastating Tornado, Town is Reborn ‘Green,’ ” USA Today, April 23, 2013.
28. Ibid.
29. Scott Wallace, “Rain Forest for Sale,” National Geographic, January 2013; Kevin Gallagher, “Pay to
Keep Oil in the Ground,” The Guardian, August 7, 2009.
30. Esperanza Martinez, “The Yasuní—ITT initiative from a Political Economy and Political Ecology
perspective,” in Leah Temper, et al., “Towards a Post-Oil Civilization: Yasunization and Other
Initiatives to Leave Fossil Fuels in the Soil,” EJOLT Report No. 6, May 2013, pp. 11, 27.
31. Angélica Navarro Llanos, “Climate Debt: The Basis of a Fair and Effective Solution to Climate
Change,” presentation to Technical Briefing on Historical Responsibility, Ad Hoc Working Group on
Long-term Cooperative Action, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Bonn,
Germany, June 4, 2009.
32. Susan Solomon et al., “Persistence of Climate Changes Due to a Range of Greenhouse Gases,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 43 (2010): 18355.
33. “Kyoto Protocol,” Kyoto Protocol, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
http://unfccc.int.
34. Matthew Stilwell, “Climate Debt—A Primer,” Development Dialogue no. 61, September 2012, p. 42;
Global Carbon Project emissions data, 2013 Budget v2.4 (July 2014), available at http://cdiac.ornl.gov.
35. Ibid.; “Global Status of Modern Energy Access,” International Energy Agency, World Energy Outlook
2012; Barbara Freese, Coal: A Human History (New York: Penguin, 2004), 64.
36. “Status of Ratification of the Convention,” UNFCCC, http://unfccc.int; “Article 3: Principles,” Full
Text of the Convention, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
http://unfccc.int; Kyoto Protocol, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
http://unfccc.int.
37. Martínez in Temper et al., “Towards a Post-Oil Civilization,” p. 32; Jonathan Watts, “Ecuador
Approves Yasuni National Park Oil Drilling in Amazon Rainforest,” Guardian, August 16, 2013.
38. Mercedes Alvaro, “Coalition to Halt Ecuador Oil-Block Development to Appeal Invalidation of
Signatures,” Wall Street Journal, May 9, 2014; Kevin M. Koenig, “Ecuador Breaks Its Amazon Deal,”
New York Times, June 11, 2014.
39. James M. Taylor, “Cancun Climate Talks Fizzle, but U.S. Agrees to Expensive New Program,”
Heartlander Magazine, The Heartland Institute, January 3, 2011.
40. Personal interview with Alice Bows-Larkin, January 14, 2013; David Remnick, “Going the Distance:
On and off the Road with Barack Obama,” The New Yorker, January 27, 2014.
41. Sustainable Buildings and Climate Initiative, Buildings and Climate Change: Summary for Decision
Makers, United Nations Environment Programme, 2009, http://www.unep.org; “Global Building Stock
Will Expand 25 Percent by 2012, Driven by Growth in Asia Pacific, Forecasts Pike Research,”
BusinessWire, December 28, 2012; “Retail and Multi-Unit Residential Segments to Drive Global
Building Space Growth through 2020,” Navigant Research, press release, September 19, 2011,
http://www.navigantresearch.com.
42. “Climate Change Leadership—Politics and Culture,” CSD Uppsala, http://www.csduppsala.uu.se; Tariq
Banuri and Niclas Hällström, “A Global Programme to Tackle Energy Access and Climate Change,”
Development Dialogue no. 61, September 2012, p. 275.
43. “ ‘The Most Obdurate Bully in the Room’: U.S. Widely Criticized for Role at Climate Talks,”
Democracy Now!, December 7, 2012.
44. Personal interview with Sunita Narain, director general, Centre for Science and Environment, May 6,
2013.

45. Nicole Itano, “No Unity at Racism Conference,” Christian Science Monitor, September 7, 2001;
Declaration of the World Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance, http://www.un.org/WCAR/durban.pdf; Ben Fox, “Caribbean Nations Seeking
Compensation for Slavery,” Associated Press, July 25, 2013; “Statement by the Honorable Baldwin
Spencer, Prime Minister of Antigua and Barbuda to 34th Regular Meeting of the Conference of Heads
of Government of the Caribbean Community, July 2013—On the Issue of Reparations for Native
Genocide and Slavery,” Caribbean Community Secretariat, press release, July 6, 2013.
46. Ta-Nehisi Coates, “The Case for Reparations,” The Atlantic, May 21, 2014.
47. Eric Williams, Capitalism and Slavery (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, [1944] 1994);
“Legacies of British Slave-ownership,” University College London, http://www.ucl.ac.uk
48. Sanchez Manning, “Britain’s Colonial Shame: Slave-owners Given Huge Payouts After Abolition,”
Independent, February 24, 2013; “Legacies of British Slave-ownership,” University College London.
49. Paul Baer, Tom Athanasiou, Sivan Kartha, and Eric Kemp-Benedict, “The Greenhouse Development
Rights Framework: The Right to Development in a Climate Constrained World,” revised 2nd edition,
Heinrich Böll Foundation, Christian Aid, EcoEquity, and the Stockholm Environment Institute, 2008;
Kartha, Athanasiou, and Paul Baer, “The North-South Divide, Equity and Development,” p. 54.
50. For more information about Greenhouse Development Rights, and to explore what the framework
could look like in practice, refer to the interactive equity calculators and other information available at
the GDRs website: http://gdrights.org. 30 PERCENT AND CARBON TRADING: Kartha,
Athanasiou, and Baer, “The North-South Divide, Equity and Development,” pp. 59–60, 64; personal
interview with Sivan Kartha, January 11, 2013.

CHAPTER 13: THE RIGHT TO REGENERATE
1. Personal interview with Tracie Washington, May 26, 2010.
2. Katsi Cook, “Woman Is the First Environment,” speech, Live Earth, National Museum of the American
Indian, Washington, D.C., July 7, 2007, http://nmai.si.edu.
3. “Global In Vitro Fertilization Market to Reach $21.6 Billion by 2020,” Allied Market Research, press
release, January 29, 2014; F. E. van Leeuwen et al., “Risk of Borderline and Invasive Ovarian Tumours
After Ovarian Stimulation for in Vitro Fertilization in a Large Dutch Cohort,” Human Reproduction 26
(2011): 3456–3465; L. Lerner-Geva et al., “Infertility, Ovulation Induction Treatments and the
Incidence of Breast Cancer—A Historical Prospective Cohort of Israeli Women,” Breast Cancer
Research Treatment 100 (2006): 201–212; Peter Henriksson et al., “Incidence of Pulmonary and Venous
Thromboembolism in Pregnancies After In Vitro Fertilisation: Cross Sectional Study,” BMJ 346
(2013): e8632.
4. Personal interview with Jonathan Henderson, May 25, 2010.
5. Cain Burdeau and Seth Borenstein, “6 Months After Oil Spill, Scientists Say Gulf Is Sick but Not
Dying,” Associated Press, October 18, 2010.
6. Doug O’Harra, “Cordova on the Brink,” Anchorage Daily News, May 1, 1994.
7. Sandra Steingraber, Raising Elijah: Protecting Our Children in an Age of Environmental Crisis
(Philadelphia: Da Capo, 2011), 28; Sandra Steingraber, Having Faith: An Ecologist’s Journey to
Motherhood (Cambridge, MA: Perseus, 2001), 88.
8. Lisa M. McKenzie et al. “Birth Outcomes and Maternal Residential Proximity to Natural Gas
Development in Rural Colorado,” Environmental Health Perspectives 122 (2014): 412–417.
9. Mark Whitehouse, “Study Shows Fracking Is Bad for Babies,” Bloomberg View, January 4, 2014.
10. Constanze A. Mackenzie, Ada Lockridge, and Margaret Keith, “Declining Sex Ratio in a First Nation
Community,” Environmental Health Perspectives 113 (2005): 1295–1298; Melody Petersen, “The Lost
Boys of Aamjiwnaang,” Men’s Health, November 5, 2009; Nil Basu et al., “Biomarkers of Chemical
Exposure at Aamjiwnaang,” McGill Environmental Health Sciences Lab Occasional Report, 2013.
11. Personal email communication with Monique Harden, codirector, Advocates for Environmental and
Human Rights, February 13, 2012; personal interview with Wilma Subra, chemist and environmental
consultant, January 26, 2012; David S. Martin, “Toxic Towns: People of Mossville ‘Are Like an
Experiment,’ ” CNN, February 26, 2010.
12. Living on Earth, “Human Rights in Cancer Alley,” April 23, 2010, http://www.loe.org; personal email
communications with Monique Harden, February 13 and 15, 2012.
13. Personal interview with Debra Ramirez, May 27, 2010; Martin, “Toxic Towns”; Subra interview,
January 26, 2012.
14. “Initial Exploration Plan, Mississippi Canyon Block 252,” BP Exploration & Production Inc., p. 14-3.
15. Personal interview with Donny Waters, February 3, 2012.
16. Monica Hernandez, “Fishermen Angry as BP Pushes to End Payments for Future Losses,” WWLTV,
July 8, 2011; personal interviews with Fred Everhardt, crabber and former St. Bernard Parish
Councilman, February 22, 2012, and March 7, 2014; personal interviews with George Barisich,
president, United Commercial Fisherman’s Association, February 22, 2012, and March 10, 2014.
17. “Scientists Find Higher Concentrations of Heavy Metals in Post–Oil Spill Oysters from Gulf of
Mexico,” California Academy of Sciences, press release, April 18, 2012; “Gulf of Mexico Clean-Up
Makes 2010 Spill 52-Times More Toxic,” Georgia Institute of Technology, press release, November
30, 2012; Roberto Rico-Martínez, Terry W. Snell, and Tonya L. Shearer, “Synergistic Toxicity of
Macondo Crude Oil and Dispersant Corexit 9500A(R) to the Brachionus Plicatilis Species Complex
(Rotifera),” Environmental Pollution 173 (2013): 5–10.

18. Personal interview with Andrew Whitehead, February 1, 2012; Andrew Whitehead et al., “Genomic
and Physiological Footprint of the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill on Resident Marsh Fishes,” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 109 (2012): 20298–20302; Benjamin Dubansky et al., “Multitissue
Molecular, Genomic, and Developmental Effects of the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill on Resident Gulf
Killifish (Fundulus grandis),” Environmental Science & Technology 47 (2013): 5074–5082.
19. “2010–2014 Cetacean Unusual Mortality Event in Northern Gulf of Mexico,” Office of Protected
Resources, NOAA Fisheries, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov; Rob Williams et al., “Underestimating the Damage: Interpreting Cetacean
Carcass Recoveries in the Context of the Deepwater Horizon/BP Incident,” Conservation Letters 4
(2011): 228.
20. Harlan Kirgan, “Dead Dolphin Calves Found in Mississippi, Alabama,” Mobile Press-Register, February
24, 2011; FOOTNOTE: “2010–2014 Cetacean Unusual Mortality Event in Northern Gulf of Mexico,”
Office of Protected Resources, NOAA Fisheries, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov.
21. Lori H. Schwacke et al., “Health of Common Bottlenose Dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) in Barataria
Bay, Louisiana, Following the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill,” Environmental Science & Technology 48
(2014): 93–103; “Scientists Report Some Gulf Dolphins Are Gravely Ill,” NOAA Fisheries, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, press release, December 18, 2013.
22. “Dolphin Deaths Related to Cold Water in Gulf of Mexico, Study Says,” Associated Press, July 19,
2012.
23. Moises Velasquez-Manoff, “Climate Turns Up Heat on Sea Turtles,” Christian Science Monitor, June 21,
2007; A. P. Negri, P. A. Marshall, and A. J. Heyward, “Differing Effects of Thermal Stress on Coral
Fertilization and Early Embryogenesis in Four Indo Pacific Species,” Coral Reefs 26 (2007): 761;
Andrew C. Baker, Peter W. Glynn, and Bernhard Riegl, “Climate Change and Coral Reef Bleaching:
An Ecological Assessment of Long-Term Impacts, Recovery Trends and Future Outlook,” Estuarine,
Coastal and Shelf Science 80 (2008): 435–471.
24. The accelerated acidification is likely due to a combination of human emissions leading to more carbon
being absorbed as well as natural upwelling of deeper, corrosive water. “MUCH MORE SENSITIVE”:
Personal interview with Richard Feely, November 20, 2012; SCALLOP DIE-OFF: Mark Hume,
“Mystery Surrounds Massive Die-Off of Oysters and Scallops off B.C. Coast,” Globe and Mail, February
27, 2014.
25. CARIBOU CALVES: Eric Post and Mads C. Forchhammer, “Climate Change Reduces Reproductive
Success of an Arctic Herbivore Through Trophic Mismatch,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B 363 (2008): 2369–2372; PIED FLYCATCHER: Christiaan Both, “Food Availability,
Mistiming, and Climatic Change,” in Effects of Climate Change on Birds, ed. Anders Pape Moller et al.
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), 129–131; Christiaan Both et al., “Climate Change and
Population Declines in a Long-Distance Migratory Birds,” Nature 441 (2006): 81–82; ARCTIC TERN:
Darryl Fears, “Biologists Worried by Migratory Birds’ Starvation, Seen as Tied to Climate Change,”
Washington Post, June 19, 2013; DENS COLLAPSING, DANGEROUSLY EXPOSED: Ed Struzik,
“Trouble in the Lair,” Postmedia News, June 25, 2012; personal interview with Steven Amstrup, chief
scientist, Polar Bears Interrnational, January 7, 2013.
26. “Arctic Rain Threatens Baby Peregrine Falcons,” CBC News, December 4, 2013; Dan Joling, “LowProfile Ring Seals Are Warming Victims,” Associated Press, March 5, 2007; Jon Aars, “Variation in
Detection Probability of Polar Bear Maternity Dens,” Polar Biology 36 (2013): 1089–1096.
27. Schwake et al., “Health of Common Bottlenose Dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) in Barataria Bay,
Louisiana, Following the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill”; L. Lauria, “Reproductive Disorders and
Pregnancy Outcomes Among Female Flight Attendants,”Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine 77
(2006): 533–539.
28. FOOTNOTE: C.D. Lynch, et. al., “Preconception Stress Increases the Risk of Infertility: Results from a
Couple-based Prospective Cohort Study—The LIFE Study,” Human Reproduction 29 (May 2014),

1067–1075.
29. Wes Jackson, “We Can Now Solve the 10,000-Year-Old Problem of Agriculture,” in Allan Eaglesham,
Ken Korth, and Ralph W. F. Hardy, eds., NABC Report 24: Water Sustainability in Agriculture, National
Agricultural Biotechnology Council, 2012, p. 41.
30. Wendell Berry, “It All Turns on Affection,” Jefferson Lecture in the Humanities, Washington, D.C.,
April 23, 2012, http://www.neh.gov.
31. Tyrone B. Hayes et al., “Demasculinization and Feminization of Male Gonads by Atrazine: Consistent
Effects Across Vertebrate Classes,” Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 127 (2011): 65,
67; Karla Gale, “Weed Killer Atrazine May Be Linked to Birth Defect,” Reuters, February 8, 2010;
Kelly D. Mattix, Paul D. Winchester, and L. R. “Tres” Scherer, “Incidence of Abdominal Wall Defects
Is Related to Surface Water Atrazine and Nitrate Levels,” Journal of Pediatric Surgery 42 (2007): 947–
949; Tye E. Arbuckle et al., “An Exploratory Analysis of the Effect of Pesticide Exposure on the Risk
of Spontaneous Abortion in an Ontario Farm Population,” Environmental Health Perspectives 109
(2001): 851–857; Rachel Aviv, “A Valuable Reputation,” The New Yorker, February 10, 2014.
32. Charles C. Mann, 1491: New Revelations of the Americas Before Columbus (New York: Vintage, 2006),
226.
33. “Transforming Agriculture with Perennial Polycultures,” The Land Institute, http://landinstitute.org.
34. Blair Fannin, “Updated 2011 Texas Agricultural Drought Losses Total $7.62 Billion,” Agrilife Today,
March 21, 2012.
35. James A. Lichatowich, Salmon Without Rivers: A History of the Pacific Salmon Crisis (Washington, D.C.:
Island Press, 2001), 54.
36. “Leanne Simpson Speaking at Beit Zatoun Jan 23rd 2012” (video), YouTube, Dreadedstar’s Channel,
January 25, 2012.
37. Personal interview with Leanne Simpson, February 22, 2013.
38. John Vidal, “Bolivia Enshrines Natural World’s Rights with Equal Status for Mother Earth,” Guardian,
April 10, 2011; Clare Kendall, “A New Law of Nature,” Guardian, September 23, 2008; FOOTNOTE:
Edgardo Lander, “Extractivism and Protest Against It in Latin America,” presented at the Question of
Power: Alternatives for the Energy Sector in Greece and Its European and Global Context, Athens,
October 2013; República del Ecuador, Constitución de la República del Ecuador de 2008, Capítulo
Séptimo: Derechos de la Naturaleza, art. 71; “Peoples Agreement of Cochabamba,” World People’s
Conference on Climate Change and the Rights of Mother Earth, April 24, 2010,
http://pwccc.wordpress.com.
39. Fiona Harvey, “Vivienne Westwood Backs Ecocide Law,” Guardian, January 16, 2014; “FAQ Ecocide,”
End Ecocide in Europe, April 16, 2013, https://www.endecocide.eu.
40. Personal interview with Mike Scott, March 23, 2013.
41. Wes Jackson, Consulting the Genius of the Place: An Ecological Approach to a New Agriculture (Berkeley:
Counterpoint, 2010).
42. Personal email communication with Gopal Dayaneni, March 6, 2014.
CONCLUSION: THE LEAP YEARS
1. Martin Luther King Jr., “Beyond Vietnam,” speech, New York, April 4, 1967, Martin Luther King Jr.
Research and Education Institute, Stanford University, http://mlk-kpp01.stanford.edu.
2. Marlene Moses, Statement on Behalf of Pacific Small Island Developing States, presented at Youth
Delegates Demand Climate Justice, side event for United Nations Youth Delegates, New York October
13, 2009.
3. Personal email communication with Brad Werner, December 22, 2012.
4. “The Future of Human-Landscape Systems II” (video), American Geophysical Union (AGU),
YouTube, December 5, 2012; personal interview with Brad Werner, October 2, 2013; Dave Levitan,
“After Extensive Mathematical Modeling, Scientist Declares ‘Earth Is F**ked,’ ” io9, December 7,
2012.

5. “The Future of Human-Landscape Systems II” (video), YouTube; personal email communication with
Brad Werner, December 22, 2012; personal interviews with Brad Werner, February 15 and October 2,
2013.
6. “The Future of Human-Landscape Systems II” (video), YouTube.
7. John Fullerton, “The Big Choice,” Capital Institute, July 19, 2011.
8. Martin Luther King Jr., Where Do We Go from Here: Chaos or Community? (Boston: Beacon, [1967]
2010), 5–6.
9. Johannes G. Hoogeveen and Berk özler, “Not Separate, Not Equal: Poverty and Inequality in PostApartheid South Africa,” Working Paper No. 739, William Davidson Institute, University of Michigan
Business School, January 2005.
10. For work exploring the multi-faceted parallels between climate change, slavery, and abolitionism more
broadly, see: Jean-François Mouhot, “Past Connections and Present Similarities in Slave Ownership
and Fossil Fuel Usage,” Climatic Change 105 (2011): 329–355; Jean-François Mouhot, Des Esclaves
Énergétiques: Réflexions sur le Changement Climatique (Seyssel: Champ Vallon, 2011); Andrew
Nikiforuk, The Energy of Slaves (Vancouver: Greystone Books, 2012); HAYES: Christopher Hayes,
“The New Abolitionism,” The Nation, April 22, 2014.
11. Greg Grandin, “The Bleached Bones of the Dead: What the Modern World Owes Slavery (It’s More
Than Back Wages),” TomDispatch, February 23, 2014; Adam Hochschild, Bury the Chains: Prophets
and Rebels in the Fight to Free an Empire’s Slaves (New York: Houghton Mifflin, 2006), 13–14, 54–55.
12. Christopher Hayes, “The New Abolitionism,” The Nation, April 22, 2014; FOOTNOTE: Seth
Rockman and Sven Beckert, eds., Slavery’s Capitalism: A New History of American Economic
Development (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, forthcoming); Sven Beckert and Seth
Rockman, “Partners in Iniquity,” New York Times, April 2, 2011; Julia Ott, “Slaves: The Capital That
Made Capitalism,” Public Seminar, April 9, 2014; Edward E. Baptist and Louis Hyman, “American
Finance Grew on the Back of Slaves,” Chicago Sun-Times, March 7, 2014; Katie Johnston, “The Messy
Link Between Slave Owners and Modern Management,” Forbes, January 16, 2013.
13. Lauren Dubois, Haiti: The Aftershocks of History (New York: Metropolitan Books, 2012), 97–100.
14. Frantz Fanon, The Wretched of the Earth (New York: Grove, 2004), 55.
15. Kari Marie Norgaard, Living in Denial: Climate Change, Emotions, and Everyday Life (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2011), 61.
16. Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, Books I–III, ed. Andrew Skinner (London: Penguin, 1999), 183–
84, 488–89.
17. Seymour Drescher, The Mighty Experiment: Free Labor Versus Slavery in British Emancipation (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2002), 34–35, 233; Thomas Clarkson, The History of the Rise, Progress, and
Accomplishment of the Abolition of the African Slave-Trade, by the British Parliament, Vol. 2 (London:
Longman, Hurst, Rees, and Orme, 1808), 580–81.
18. Wendell Phillips, “Philosophy of the Abolition Movement: Speech Before the Massachusetts
Antislavery Society (1853),” in Speeches, Lectures, and Letters (Boston: James Redpath, 1863), 109–10;
Frederick Douglass, “The Meaning of July Fourth for the Negro,” speech at Rochester, New York, July
5, 1852, in Frederick Douglass: Selected Speeches and Writings, ed. Philip S. Foner and Yuval Taylor
(Chicago: Chicago Review Press, 2000), 196.
19. David Brion Davis, Inhuman Bondage: The Rise and Fall of Slavery in the New World (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2006), 1.
20. Desmond Tutu, “We Need an Apartheid-Style Boycott to Save the Planet,” Guardian, April 10, 2014.
21. Luis Hernández Navarro, “Repression and Resistance in Oaxaca,” CounterPunch, November 21, 2006.
22. Personal interview with Sivan Kartha, January 11, 2013.

INDEX
Aamjiwnaang First Nation, 428–29
Abbey, Edward, 286
abolition movement, 450, 455–57, 462–63
Aboriginal and Treaty Rights, 368–72; see also Indigenous peoples, land rights of Acción Ecológica, 309,
408–9
acid rain, 204, 208, 218
Action Center for Education and Community Development, 106
Adam, Allan, 384
Adams, John, 84
Africa, 12, 19, 175, 179, 414
effects of Pinatubo Option in, 260, 268, 270, 287
neocolonialism in, 47, 48–49
Sahel of, 270, 274, 275–76
volcanic eruptions and, 272, 274
African Americans, 53, 415, 453–54
toxic dumping in communities of, 205, 429–30
African National Congress, 455
agriculture:
agro-ecological methods in, 134–36, 284, 438
decentralization of, 133–34
family farms vs. Big Ag in, 399–400
industrial (Big Ag), 9, 77–78, 133–36, 210, 399–400, 438–39
local and organic, 134–35, 222, 404–5
low-energy, 90, 91
natural fertility of ecosystems vs., 438–39
small-scale sustainable, 127, 438
wind turbines and, 131–32
agrofuel businesses, 238–39
Agung eruption (1963), 274
air-conditioning, 47
air travel, 1–2, 3, 15, 76, 90, 113, 231, 238, 241–44
Alaska, 112, 147, 273–74, 333, 337, 375, 376, 420
Alberta:
disappearance of moose from, 27
Indigenous people in, 315, 372
Alberta Energy Regulator, 327
Alberta tar sands, 2, 23, 27, 71, 139–41, 144, 145, 147, 179, 237, 245–49, 281, 301, 312, 315, 325, 331,
349, 372, 381, 451
ecological and human health impact of, 325–27, 345
economic boom and, 45, 67

as economic disrupter, 386
Indigenous lawsuits over, 378–79, 384
Pierre River Mine project in, 379–80, 383
possible fuel bans on, 246, 248–49
transport of machinery for, 318–19
Albrecht, Glenn, 165
Alcoa, 226
Alden, Charlene, 390–93
Alier, Joan Martínez, 202
Allende, Salvador, 454
Alward, David, 374
Amazon Basin, 180, 182, 197, 221, 291
anti-oil movement in, 304, 353, 376
dieback in, 13
Amazon Watch, 411
American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1, 31, 152
American Council on Renewable Energy, 67
American Dream, supersizing of, 22
American Economic Association, 428
American Electric Power, 196, 221
American Enterprise Institute (AEI), 282–83
American Freedom Alliance, 53n
American Gas Association, 213
American Geophysical Union (AGU), 60, 62, 449
American Petroleum Institute, 227
Americans for Prosperity (AFP), 53
Amnesty International, 167
anarchists, 178
Anderson, Germaine, 379
Anderson, Kevin, 13, 21, 56, 86–89, 91, 214, 283
Andhra Pradesh, India, 350
Angotti, Tom, 235n
Anishinaabe, 443
anti-apartheid movement, 454–55
anti-coal movements, 10, 197, 300–301, 319–20, 322–23, 346, 348–49, 350–52, 365, 370, 374, 376, 389,
397, 398–99, 408, 445
anti-fracking movements, 299–300, 303–4, 317–18, 335, 347, 348, 361, 362, 365, 370, 373–74, 381, 403–4
Antigua and Barbuda, 415
antinuclear movement, 136, 138, 398
antipoverty activists, 157
Antoine, Paula, 375
Apfel, Dan, 401
Appadurai, Anjali, 11
Appalachia, 46, 309, 353
aquifers, 147, 328, 346, 347
Arab Spring, 9, 464
Arab states, 58
Arch Coal, 342–43, 391, 397
Arctic, 14, 15, 270
Arctic drilling, 141

accidents in, 332, 333
Greenpeace protests against, 300
high risk in, 324
Indigenous opposition to, 375–76
proposed ban on, 353
Arctic Sunrise, 300
Argentina, 123, 180
Arizona, 398–99
Army Corps of Engineers, 3
Arnold, Matthew, 215
arrogant ignorance, 267–68
arts, public funding for, 10
Ashton, John, 150
Asia:
coal imports in, 320, 352, 413
effects of Pinatubo Option in, 260, 270, 287
free trade zones in, 19
greenhouse gas emissions in, 412
renewable energy and, 349–50
Asian Pacific Environmental Network (APEN), 155, 156, 321
asthma, 94
AT&T, 208
Athabasca Chipewyan First Nation (ACFN), 326, 379–80, 383–84
Athabasca River, 326
Athanasiou, Tom, 388
Athens, 157
Atlantic, 415
Atlantic salmon, 441
atomic bomb, 277–78
atrazine, 439
Attwater’s prairie chickens, 191–95
austerity, 9, 17, 61, 72, 77, 110, 132, 154, 158
community-controlled alternative energy as response to, 132–33
natural disaster and, 106–10
personal, 116–18
Austin, Tex., 99
Australia, 178, 242, 250, 354
climate change and, 27, 35, 36, 250, 290
extractive exports from, 143, 301
Gorgon project in, 145–46
Great Barrier Reef of, 146–48, 301
Indigenous land rights in, 182, 376
Nauru and, 162, 163, 166–67
renewable energy and, 102
Australian Marine Conservation Society, 301
Austria, 99
automobile industry, 113
bailout of, 121–22, 124, 125
Ayn Rand Institute, 36
Ayres, Ed, 280

Babones, Salvatore, 243n
Bach, Amy, 109
Bacon, Francis, 170, 173, 174, 177, 184, 266
Baer, Paul, 388
Bakken oil field, 71, 311, 325
Balcombe, England, 299–300, 403–4
Bangladesh, 82, 109, 154
banks, 39
bailouts of, 6, 110, 121–26, 158
nationalization of, 123
Banks, Joseph, 266
Banuri, Tariq, 413–14
Baptiste, Marilyn, 345, 365
Bárcena Ibarra, Alicia, 180
Barnes, William, 189
Barnett Shale, 329
Barrow Island, 145
Barton, Joe, 47, 228
Bast, Joseph, 34, 41, 42
bats, disappearance of, 27
Battistoni, Alyssa, 94
Bay Localize, 157
Bazemore, Wally, 105n
Beaver Lake Cree Nation, 27, 378–79
Beckley, W.Va., 310
Beijing, 17–18, 23, 351
Bella Bella, Canada, 337–42, 344, 363
Bellingham, Wash., 349, 352, 374, 403
Bell, Larry, 33, 47
Berger, John, 120
Berkshire Hathaway, 234
Berlin, 97, 98
Berry, Wendell, 268, 335–36, 438
Betsimisaraka, 220
“Beyond Coal” campaign, 349, 397
Beyond Vietnam (King), 449
Beyond Zero Emissions, 102
BG Group, 145
Bhopal Action Resource Group, 206
BHP Billiton, 196
Big Green, 20, 85, 87–88, 124
Blockadia and, 355–58, 403
carbon trading and, 218–25
climate change debate and, 198–201
climate debt seen as politically toxic by, 414
energy investments of, 196–97
Indigenous land rights and, 387
insider strategies of, 203–4, 205–11
natural gas advocated by, 199–201, 213–17

patriotism as core message for, 57–58
as pro-corporate, 196–97, 207–11, 213, 215–16
renewable energy downplayed by, 199–200
USCAP created by, 226–28
biochar process, 245
biodiversity, 13, 134
biofuels, 32, 97, 231–32, 238–41, 251–52, 253, 287
biological weapons, banning of, 278
biosphere, as self-organizing, complex, adaptive system, 267
Birol, Fatih, 23
birth defects, environmental toxins and, 428, 429–30, 439
bitumen, see tar sands
Black Mesa Water Coalition, 398–99, 402
Black Sea, 349
Blake, William, 157
Blazevic, Sara, 355
Blockadia, 293–336, 450–51
abolition and civil rights movements compared to, 450, 453, 455–57
Big Green and, 355–58, 403
as constructive movement, 405
early victories of, 348–53, 359, 370
as global grassroots movement, 294–96, 303–4, 321–23
in Global South, 412
government repression of, 297–99, 361–62, 410–11
as impetus for uniting of Indigenous peoples and non-Natives, 373–74, 380–84, 443–45
Indigenous peoples in, 139, 177; see also Indigenous peoples, land rights of intergenerational character
of, 445
love of place in, 337–66, 370–71
moral imperative in, 336, 386–87, 464
precautionary principle adopted by, 335–36
as pro-democracy movement, 361, 380
as pro-water movement, 344–47
regenerative worldview in, 443–46
social media and, 303, 466
women as leaders in, 303
see also specific groups and protests
Bloomberg Carbon Risk Valuation Tool, 235
Bloomberg, Michael, 49, 176, 216, 230, 235–36, 252
Bloomberg Philanthropies, 216
Bloomberg View, 428
BlueGreen Alliance, 126, 156
Blue Planet Prize, 22
Bolivia, 5, 7, 18, 40, 180, 377, 409, 443–44
Bollier, David, 130
Bonogofsky, Alexis, 319, 342–43, 390, 392–93, 396
Bopha, Typhoon, 465
borders, hyper-militarized, 154
Bostic, Jason, 337
Boston, Mass., 13
Boucher, Jim, 386

Boulder, Colo., 98–99
Boulton, Matthew, 266
Bows-Larkin, Alice, 87–89, 412
BP, 111, 129, 130, 215, 226, 227–28, 236, 282
Big Green funding from, 196, 198
Greenland project of, 385
lax government regulation of, 330–31
profit-over-safety culture of, 330–31, 333, 376
BP, Deepwater Horizon disaster of, 112, 144, 201, 290, 316, 324, 330, 332, 376, 385–86, 420
impact on marine life of, 425–26, 431–34, 451
lack of preparedness in, 330
miscarriages linked to, 424–25
pre-explosion risk assessment report on, 430–31
BP America, 196
BP Capital, 237
Braided Hair, Vanessa, 396, 397
Brainstorm Green, 229
Brand, Russell, 155
Brand, Stewart, 288
Branson, Richard, 230–33, 235–54, 257, 260, 263, 264, 284–85, 288–89
biofuels development pledge of, 231–32, 238–41, 251–52, 253
Carbon War Room of, 232, 239, 251
Virgin Earth Challenge of, 232, 244–49, 251
see also Virgin Group
Braun, Clait E., 192
Brazil, 5, 13, 82, 130, 145, 157, 179, 202, 221–22, 412
Breakthrough Institute, 57
Brecher, Jeremy, 401, 402
Briner, Brad, 235
Britain, see United Kingdom
British Columbia, 302, 312, 319, 419–20
disappearance of starfish from, 27
Northern Gateway pipeline proposal in, 337–42, 344–45, 363, 365–66, 367, 380
scallop collapse in, 434
Supreme Court of, 368–69
British Social Attitudes survey, 117
Bronx Zoo, 183
Brookings Institution, 290
Brower, Kenneth, 289
Browne, Sir John, 111, 130
Brownstein, Mark, 356
Brown University, 428
Brulle, Robert, 44, 199
Brundtland, Gro Harlem, 22
Brune, Michael, 357
Buenos Aires, 123
Buffett, Warren, 233–34, 252
buildings:
greenhouse gas emissions from, 412–13
retrofitting of, 108, 122, 124

Build Our Energy Barn, 403
Bulgaria, 348
Bunzl, Martin, 269–70
Burkina Faso, 270
Burlington Northern Santa Fe railroad, 234
Burnt Church, Canada, 372–73
Bury the Chains (Hochschild), 456
Büscher, Bram, 223–24
Bush, George H. W., 208
Bush, George W., 211–12, 328
cadmium, 176
Caldeira, Ken, 263–64, 271
Calgary, Canada, 2, 245–49
California, 13, 52, 347
California, University of:
at Davis, Institute of Transportation Studies at, 101
at Irvine, 14
Cameron, David, 7, 106–7, 110, 149, 251
Cameron, James, 449
Canada, 11, 17, 19, 71, 83, 143
divestment movement in, 354
environmental legislation in, 202
extractive industry subsidies in, 127
fossil fuels in, 69, 79, 178
fracking in, 299, 303–4, 313
government attacks on Indigenous land rights in, 381–82
government repression of environmental protest in, 299, 303
politics of climate change in, 36, 46
pro-mining policies of, 382
S&P rating of, 368
tar sands in, see Alberta tar sands
weakening of environmental protections in, 381–82
Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers, 149
Canadian Auto Workers Union, 122
Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives, 70, 129, 400
Canadian Natural Resources, 281
Canadian Security Intelligence Service, 362
cancer, tar sands linked to, 327
cap-and-trade system, 208, 218, 226–29, 287
cap and dividend, 118
capitalism, 22, 25, 38–39, 47, 61, 88, 89, 125, 158, 159, 176, 179, 228n, 233, 450
and attempts to mitigate climate change, 230–55
climate change as argument against, 157
climate change regulation seen as threat to, 31, 33
conservation and, 185–86
deregulated, 18, 20, 75, 154
disaster, 51, 109, 154, 233
fossil fuels and, 175, 176
Gaia, 231

industrial, 173–74, 177
nature vs., 177, 186
rebranding of, 252
see also free-market ideology
Capital in the Twenty-First Century (Piketty), 154–55
carbon:
atmospheric, 109
high-risk, 130
new sources of, 141
carbon bubble, 358
carbon budget, collective, 153
carbon cowboys, 220–21
carbon credits, 305
carbon dioxide, 143
recycling into products, 246–47
carbon emissions, 14, 23, 79
caps on, 118, 141, 208, 218, 226–29, 287
climate debt and, 409
cutting of, see carbon reduction
of developing world, 409–10
historical evidence for, 415, 452
Industrial Revolution and increase in, 175–76, 409
rising levels of, 4, 11, 13, 14–15, 26
of U.S., 113, 409
wartime activities and, 17
wealth and, 113–14
see also greenhouse gas emissions
Carbon Engineering, 281
carbon footprint, 77, 144, 178, 235, 247, 248, 288
carbon markets, 211, 218–25, 233
failure of, 224–25, 252
carbon offsets, 8, 39, 212, 251, 287
ineffectiveness of, 223–24, 387
carbon sequestration, 134, 218, 221–23, 232, 245, 247–48, 284, 439
carbon-sucking machines, 236, 244, 245, 254, 257, 260, 263, 279, 288
carbon taxes, 112, 114, 125, 157, 218, 250, 400, 461
Carbon Tracker Initiative, 148
carbon trading, 39, 87, 124, 125, 199–201, 208, 218, 226–29, 287, 418
Carbon War Room, 199, 264
Cargill, 89
Caribbean, 240, 414–15
caribou, 435
Carleton College, 401
Carmichael, Ruth, 433–34
cars, 16, 90–91, 116, 210
Carson, Rachel, 185, 201, 207, 286, 337
Carter, Bob, 33, 47
Carter, Jimmy, 116–17, 205
Carter, Nick, 349
Case for Climate Engineering, A (Keith), 275

Casselton, N.Dak., 312, 333
Castro, Rodrigo, 161
Caterpillar, 227
Cato Institute, 32, 33, 36, 39, 45, 142
CBC, 362
CBS This Morning, 288
cell phones, 91n
Cenovus, 349
Center for American Progress, 111
Center for Biological Diversity, 206
Center for Strategic and International Studies, 53
Center for Sustainable Shale Development (CSSD), 216, 356n Central America, sweatshops in, 81
Centre for Science and Environment, 96, 414
Centrica, 149
centrism, 22, 59, 83
Cha, J. Mijin, 216
Chad, 270
Chamber of Commerce, U.S., 31, 48
chaos theory, 267
Chappell, Ronnie, 228
charitable foundations, 205–6, 210n
extractive industries and, 197–98
Charter of Rights and Freedoms, Canadian, 371
Chávez, Hugo, 179, 182
Chen Jiping, 351
Chesapeake Energy, 312, 356–57
Chevron, 111, 129, 221, 291
Ecuador’s lawsuit against, 309, 378
Gorgon project of, 145–46
green groups funded by, 196, 217
Niger Delta operations of, 308
Pungesti shale gas project of, 298–99, 347, 404
Richmond refinery of, 321, 402
Chicago, University of, 81
Chilcotin River, 345
children, impact of environmental toxins on, 427–29
Childs, Mike, 250
Chile, 9, 454, 464
Chilko River, 345
China, 5, 24, 55, 58, 79, 82, 88n, 451
air pollution in, 17–18, 23, 350, 351
anti-coal movement in, 300, 350–52
carbon emissions from, 409–10, 411, 412
Central Committee, Communist Party, 133
coal exports to, 234
coal use in, 81–82, 83
coolant factories in, 219–20
Copenhagen nonbinding agreement signed by, 12
as creditor, 180
economic growth in, 351–52

as emerging market, 20
environmental contamination in, 23, 83, 154
export-led development in, 81
fast-growing economy of, 40, 153
human rights issues in, 351–52
peasant uprisings in, 350–51
renewable energy programs in, 352
solar energy and, 66, 68, 69–70, 72
wealth in, 114
WTO challenges brought against, 64–65, 68, 70
WTO challenges brought by, 65
WTO membership of, 76
Chisholm, Sallie, 267
Chrétien, Jean, 83
Chrysler, 67, 68
Chukchi Sea, 375–76
CIA, 53
civil disobedience, 139
civil rights movement, 204–5, 450, 453
Clarkson, Thomas, 463
Clatskanie, Oreg., 349
clear-cutting, 296, 304, 310
Climate Action Network, 149
climate change, 73, 110, 165, 176, 177, 230, 249
acceptable risk and, 335
astronaut’s-eye view of, 284–90, 296
centrist organizations and, 198–201
community and, 364–65
computer models of, 270–71
corporate deregulation and, 20
defining of, 210
democracy and, 363–64
developing world on, 75
disasters and, 2–3, 17, 102–3, 154, 406, 465
fracking and, 199
as transformative force, 7, 8, 152–60
Indigenous rights and, 380–84, 385
individual vs. corporate conservation in, 116–18
marine infertility and, 433–35
mitigation of, 134
negotiations on, 11
past and future generations in, 158–59
as planetary emergency, 6, 7, 15, 17, 18, 449–50, 459–60
planetary exodus as solution to, 288–89
and power relation between humans and earth, 175
as result of cumulative emissions, 21, 40, 56, 175, 409–10, 416
roots of, 159–60
sacrifice zones and, 310–11, 315
“safe” limit of, 12–13
tipping points for, 14, 412

2 degrees Celsius boundary in, 87–88, 89, 150, 354, 456
wealth creation and, 46–52
weather patterns and, 269
climate change denial, 2–5, 26, 43, 91, 119, 282–83, 394, 407, 451
economics as factor in, 3, 45–46, 59–60
extractive industries’ funding of, 44–45, 149, 198
increase in, 35
partisan approach to, 35–36
right-wing, 31–63, 154, 178
socioeconomic privilege and, 46–52
technological miracles and, 3
Climate of Corruption (Bell), 33
climate debt, 5, 7, 457
owed to developing world, 5, 7, 40, 387, 408–18
owed to Indigenous peoples, 387, 388–99, 408
seen as politically toxic, 414
Climate Depot, 32, 45
Climategate, 41
climate justice, see climate debt
climate manipulation, see geoengineering
climate movement:
coming of age of, 11–12
deregulated capitalism and, 20
economic justice and, see climate debt
growing power and interconnectedness of, 451–52
historical precedents for, 452–57, 459–61
Keystone XL protests and resurgence of, 139–40
lack of sustained and populist, 157
moral imperative in, 336, 386–87, 464
and need for viable economic alternatives to extraction industries, 349, 398, 399, 400–401, 403, 413–
18
origins of, 73–75
see also Blockadia
climate science, 46, 59, 127, 152, 158
climate treaty negotiations, 11, 77–80, 411
see also emission reduction
Clinton, Bill, 83–85, 213, 231–32
Clinton administration, carbon trading proposed by, 218
Clinton Global Initiative annual meeting of 2006, 231
Clodumar, Kinza, 165
Clorox, 356, 357
cloud brightening, 258
cloud seeding, 279
Club of Rome, 185–86
CNN, 45
Coal & Climate Summit, 200
coal, 102, 128, 143, 159, 176, 214, 224
capitalism and, 175, 176
collapsing U.S. market for, 319–20
exporting of, 144n, 301, 320, 322, 349, 352, 362, 374, 376

lignite, 136
as “portable climate,” 174
rail transport of, 234, 362, 389, 397
water power vs., 171–73
coal-fired power plants, 3, 67–68, 81–82, 83, 97, 136–39, 141, 200, 208, 236, 247–48
global campaign against, 319–20, 348–49, 350–52, 365
public utilities and, 100, 196
coal industry, 197, 300–301
opposition to, see anti-coal movements
political and economic power of, 316, 321
see also extractive industries
coal mining, 145, 398
in Appalachia, 309, 353
in Montana, 320, 342–43, 346, 370, 388–93, 395, 397, 445
mountaintop removal in, 2, 303, 309, 310, 329, 353
water supply contamination from, 332
coal-powered economies, 88
Coates, Ta-Nehisi, 415
Cobenais, Marty, 318–19, 332
Cochabamba, Bolivia, 444n
Cohen, Nick, 156
Cold War, 15, 42, 43, 74, 261
collective action, 36
collective sacrifice, 16–17
colleges and universities:
divestment movement and, 354–55, 401
renewable energy investment by, 401–2
Colombia, 202, 348, 376–77
colonialism, 154, 370, 414–16
coal and, 173, 176
extractivism and, 169–70
Industrial Revolution and, 171, 175, 457
Scientific Revolution and, 170–71
Colorado, 52, 357n
Colorado School of Public Health, 428
Combes, Maxime, 304n, 317–18
Committee for a Constructive Tomorrow, 45
Common Sense (Paine), 314
communism, 20, 39, 42, 44, 177
communities, 106
building of, 92
climate change and, 364–65
renewable energy in, 131–32, 133
see also worldview, communitarian
Community Supported Agriculture (CSA) programs, 405
compassion, 62–63, 462
Competitive Enterprise Institute, 32, 45, 411
complexity, 267, 290
composting systems, 108
computer models, of climate change, 270–71

Conant, Lionel, 380
Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation, 319
Conference Board of Canada, 145
Congo, 220
ConocoPhillips, 226, 227–28, 246
Conservation Fund, 196, 205
Conservation International, 84, 189, 196, 205–6, 209, 211–12
Conservative Party (Canadian), 36
Constitution, Canadian, 371
construction, green, 90
consumer lifestyles, 2, 75, 116–17
consumption, 116
decrease in, 90
excess, 85, 91, 92, 93, 210, 412, 413
green, 211–13, 252
container ships, 76, 79
Conway, Erik, 42
Cook, James, 266
Cook, Katsi, 419
coolants, 219–20
“Cool Dudes” (McCright and Dunlap), 46–47
Coon, David, 374
co-ops:
energy, 130, 131–32
worker-run, 122–23, 133
Coos Bay, Oreg., 349
Copenhagen Climate Summit of 2009, 11–14, 34, 150, 262, 451
copper, 91n, 296
coral, coral reefs, 301, 348, 434
Corexit, 432
Cornell University, 143, 217, 317
corn ethanol, 239, 240
corporate donors, 83, 210n
corporations, 25
centralization under, 179
crisis exploited by, 8
democracy vs., 7
deregulation of, 19, 20, 72, 142, 154, 210
disaster prevention at, 51–52
environmental groups’ cooperation with, 196, 206–11
freedom from regulation for, 19
free speech for, 151
goals of private, 129–30
ideology of, 75
impact of climate change on, 49
Indigenous peoples vs., 221–23
natural world vs., 60–61
political power of, 199, 124–26, 141–52
right-wing think tanks funded by, 44, 50
taxes avoided by, 115

USCAP and, 226–28
Correa, Rafael, 180–81, 410–11
corruption, of government regulators, 333–34
Cosbey, Aaron, 70
Costa Rica, 348
Coste, Torrance, 363
“Cowboys and Indians alliance,” 302, 318–19, 322–23, 346
crash of 1929, 88
Crawford, Julia Trigg, 361
Crompton, Tom, 60
crops, 9, 34, 57
crowdfunding, 198
Crow Reservation, 389, 397
Crutzen, Paul, 261–62
Cuadrilla, 130
cultural cognition, 36, 44–45, 59, 63, 186
Culture of Narcissism (Lasch), 117
Czechoslovakia, 178
Czech Republic, 42–43, 144, 348
Dai, Aiguo, 272, 275
Daily Mail, 5454
Dallas, Tex., 329
Daly, Herman, 173
dams, 180, 183, 202
Daniel, Patrick, 331–32
dark money, 44
Darling, Jay Norwood “Ding,” 185
Dauphin Island Sea Lab, 433–34
David, Ned, 247
Davis, David Brion, 463
Dayaneni, Gopal, 448
Day One, 391
DDT, 185, 201, 203, 207
de Boer, Yvo, 87
decade zero, 24, 143
Dediu, Doina, 344
deep ecology, 75
deepwater drilling, see offshore drilling, deepwater
Defense Department, U.S., 113
deforestation, 202
degrowth strategies:
selective, 93–95
for wealthy nations, 88, 89
Delaware River Basin, 346
Delgamuukw v. British Columbia, 371
Delingpole, James, 42
Delucchi, Mark A., 101
democracy:
Blockadia and, 361, 380

climate change as crisis in, 363–64
corporations vs., 7
free trade agreements as threat to, 358–60
Democratic party, 35, 83, 141, 153, 234
climate change accepted by majority in, 35–36
climate change deniers in, 46
Demos, 216
Denmark, renewable energy in, 70, 131–32, 138, 179, 398
deregulation, 8, 19, 20, 72, 142, 154, 210
Derham, William, 171
derivatives market, weather, 8–9
De Schutter, Olivier, 134–35
“Design to Win: Philanthropy’s Role in the Fight Against Global Warming,” 199
Detroit, Mich., 154
developed world:
blame passed by, 82
capping of emissions from, 218
carbon emissions from, 40, 75, 79–80, 411
climate debt of, 387, 388–99, 408–18, 457
developing world, 75, 110, 180, 257
climate debt as excuse for pollution by, 412
climate debt owed to, 5, 7, 40, 387, 408–18
greenhouse gas emissions from, 79–80, 82, 409–10, 411, 412
green technologies for, 76, 85
and move to low-emissions economy, 417
poverty in, 40, 55, 88n, 179–82, 409, 416, 418
trade access to, 85
diabetes, 150, 161, 164
dirty energy, see extractive industries
disaster:
austerity and, 106–10
climate change and, 2–3, 17, 102–3, 154, 406, 465
infrastructure for, 51
as opportunities for change, 406–7, 465
profit and, 9, 109
public spending and, 106–10
response to, 103–6
disaster denialism, 51
diseases, 14, 176
dispersants, 325
Divest Harvard, 354
divestment movement, 206, 353–58, 365, 401, 402–3, 451
Dixson, Bob, 407
Doe, Aria, 106
dolphins, die-off of, 432–34, 436
Donahue, Bill, 326
Donohue, Thomas J., 31
Douglass, Frederick, 463
Dow Chemical, 226
Dowie, Mark, 83–84, 203

Downie, Ewan, 382
droughts, 9, 14, 107, 165, 440
Pinatubo Option and, 279
volcanic eruptions and, 272–73
Dubner, Stephen J., 262–63, 271–72
Duke Energy, 196, 226
Duke University, 328–29, 401
Dunlap, Riley, 35, 38, 46–47
DuPont, 226, 227
Dust Bowl, 64
Earth Day, 153, 206–7, 285
Earth First!, 206, 310
Earth Mother/Mother Earth concept, 419, 423–24, 443–44
earthquakes, fracking and, 329
East Bay Tea Party, 38
Eastern Bloc, 75
Eckersley, Robyn, 77
Eckhart, Michael T., 67
EcoEquity, 417–18
ecological amnesia, 3–4
Ecological Economics, 185–86
Ecological Economics (Daly and Farley), 173
economic disruption:
extractive industries and, 316, 386
minimizing of, 12
economic geologists, 46
economic growth, 21, 129–30, 186
atmospheric limits vs., 86–89
in capitalism, 89
climate change denial and, 3, 45–46, 59–60
corporate deregulation and, 19
dirty model of, 82
limits on, 185–86
orthodoxy of, 81, 94, 178
economic justice, 10, 59, 91, 94, 157
see also climate debt
economy:
climate action and, 21, 90, 124–26, 155, 252, 453
decentralized, 158
elite control over, 18
fracking and, 94
fossil fuel, 23, 45–46, 121, 173, 456
local, 7, 68–70, 71, 76, 85–86
planned, 94
post-growth, 178
resource-intensive, 21
wage and price controls in, 125
ecosystems:
fertility cycle of, 438–39, 446–48

loss of, 13
restoration of, 93, 127, 444
ectopic pregnancy, 425
Ecuador, 13, 180, 197, 220, 377
Chevron lawsuit of, 309, 378
climate debt and, 408–9
constitutional rights of nature in, 443–44
EDF Energy, 149
Edmonton, Canada, 302
Edwards, Murray, 281
“effervescence of rebellion,” 465
Egypt, 158
El Chichón eruption (1982), 274
Eldorado Gold, Skouries forest project of, 293–94, 296–98, 303, 314, 342, 347, 445
elections:
of 1992, 83
of 2008, 149
of 2012, 149
electricity grids, 90, 122, 133
electronic waste, 91
Ellis-Lamkins, Phaedra, 92
Elsipogtog First Nation, 299, 370, 373, 374
Elwha River, 374–75
Elysium, 59
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 174
emission credits, 219–20
emission reduction, 16, 18–19, 31, 55, 73, 79, 85, 88, 90, 108–9, 127, 144n, 146, 154, 157–58, 213, 218,
283, 355
failure of, 256, 276
historical responsibility vs. capacity to contribute to, 417–18
voluntary, 232
see also climate treaty negotiations
empathy, 46–54, 62–63
Enbridge:
Canadian Security Intelligence Service as lobbyist for, 362
Michigan pipeline rupture of, 331–32, 338
profit-over-safety culture of, 331, 333
see also Northern Gateway pipeline
Enbridge NB, 362
endocrine disruptors, 439
energy, public ownership of, 7, 284
energy conservation, 116–18
Energy Department, U.S., 102, 214, 247, 282
energy efficiency, 127
energy nationalization, 130, 454
energy plants, “combined-cycle,” 129
Energy Policy, 101, 102
energy sources, zero-carbon, 18
EnergyWire, 332
Engelfried, Nick, 314

Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR), 247–48
Enlightenment, 159, 178
Environics, 36
Environment Agency (EA), U.K., 106–7
Environmental Action, 213
Environmental Coalition for NAFTA, 84
Environmental Defense Fund (EDF), 84, 191, 198, 201, 233n, 235–36, 257
carbon trading supported by, 218, 226–29
fracking supported by, 215–17, 235n, 355–56
pro-business makeover of, 207–10, 233
environmental impact assessments, 203
environmentalism:
acceptable risk and, 335
astronaut’s-eye view adopted by, 286–87, 296
command and control, 204
grassroots, 305–10; see also Big Green; Blockadia
Keystone pipeline and revival of, 303
top-down, failures of, 295
“environmentalism of the poor,” 202
environmental justice, 92, 155
see also climate debt
environmental movement, 157, 197
cap-and-trade and, 229
golden age of environmental law in, 201–4
green consumerism and, 211–13
insider strategy of, 203–4
NAFTA supported by, 83–85
political timidity in, 184–85, 186–87
privileged origins of, 183, 201, 211–12
pro-business ideology in, 207–11, 213
radicalism in, 183–86, 201–3, 206–7
in Reagan era and following, 203–11
schisms in, 206–7
singlemindedness of, 153
see also Big Green
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 48, 118, 227, 328
Northern Cheyenne and, 390, 393
Environmental Rights Action (Nigeria), 309
Environment Canada, 325, 326–37
ethane, 328
eucalyptus, 239
eugenics, taboo against, 278
Europe:
emissions from, 40, 411
program cuts in, 110
“squares movement” in, 464
wealth in, 114
European Community, environmental law in, 202
European Parliament, 91n, 114
European Transport Workers Federation, 127

European Union, 218
airline taxes considered by, 249
Emissions Trading System (ETS) of, 219, 225, 226
fuel quality standards of, 71, 248–49
renewable energy in, 138
U.S. oil and gas exports restriction and, 71
WTO challenges brought against, 65, 70
WTO challenges brought by, 68–69
executive pay, 111, 112
extinctions, 14
extractive industries, 79, 121, 133, 141, 181, 213
alienation of onetime friends by, 313
Big Green and, 191–201
billionaires’ investments in, 235–37
climate change deniers funded by, 44–45, 149
depletion of conventional reserves in, 310
divestment movement and, 206, 353–58, 365, 401, 402–3
donations to environmental groups by, 196–97, 215–16
early victories against, 348–53
ecologically and socially responsible, 447
as economic disrupters, 316, 386
economic and political power of, 149, 151, 377–80, 384–87, 400, 403, 461
emissions regulations blocked by, 200
extreme projects of, 295, 303, 304, 310, 311, 315–34, 446
free trade agreements and, 358–60
geoengineering and, 281–84
government collusion with, 297–99, 303, 306–7, 308, 360, 361–66, 378–80
grassroots opposition to, 305–10; see also Blockadia; climate movement growth as measure of, 129–30
high risk in, 324–25, 331
Indigenous land rights and, see Indigenous peoples, land rights of
infrastructures of, 315–24
lawsuits against, 112, 309, 368, 371–72, 378–80, 384, 386
lax regulation of, 129, 330–31, 333
lobbying by, 149–50
local ecology ignored by, 295
nationalization of, 130, 454
new technologies developed by, 145–46, 253, 310
polluter pays principle and, 110–19, 202–3
profit-seeking imperative of, 111, 126, 129, 148, 253, 330–31
progress blocked by, 110–11, 149
publicly owned, 130
public mistrust of, 330, 332, 333, 334
reserve-replacement ratio of, 146–47
sacrifice zones in, 172–73, 310–15
self-preservation instinct of, 149, 253
shareholders of, 111, 112, 128, 129, 146–47, 148
spills and accidents in, 330–34; see also specific accidents
Steyer’s walking away from, 235
subsidies for, 70, 115, 118, 127, 418
tobacco companies compared to, 355

transient culture of, 343–44
water requirements of, 346
see also fossil fuels; specific industries and operations
extractivism, 161–87, 442, 443, 459, 460–61
colonialism and, 169–70
defined, 169
postcolonial, 179–82
progressive, 181–82
sustainability and, 447
Exxon, 145, 147
ExxonMobil, 44–45, 111, 113, 150, 192, 196, 234, 236, 238, 282, 283, 314
Exxon Valdez oil spill, 337–39, 426
Eyre, Nick, 90
factories:
green credits for, 219
retrofitting of, 122–23
fact resistance, 37
fairness:
austerity and, 117–19
individual vs. corporate, 116–18
see also climate debt
famine, 270, 272, 273, 274
Fanon, Frantz, 459
Farallon Capital Management, 234–35
Farley, Joshua, 173
farming, farmers, see agriculture
Farrell, John, 99–100
FedEx, 51, 208, 210
feedback loops, 14
feed-in tariffs, 67, 131, 133
Feely, Richard, 434
feminist movement, 177, 453–54
Fenberg, Steve, 98–99
Ferguson, Brian, 349
Ferris, Deeohn, 314
fertility cycle, of ecosystems, 438–39, 446–48
fertility industry, 421–22
Feygina, Irina, 57
Figueres, Christiana, 200–201
financial crisis of 2008, 5–6, 9, 39, 44, 80, 88, 110, 120–26, 151, 158, 223, 392
financial markets, instability of, 19
financial transaction tax, 114
Finkenthal, Daniel, 207
firefighting, 72, 108, 109
First National People of Color Environmental Leadership Summit, 205
First Nations:
in anti-pipeline campaigns, 340, 345, 365–66
government dismissal of pollution claims by, 326
water supplies of, 384

see also Indigenous peoples; specific peoples
fisheries collapses, 14
Flannery, Tim, 176
flaring, of natural gas, 219, 305–6
Fleming, James, 263, 270
floods, 14, 72
austerity budgets and, 106–7
business opportunities in, 9
Florida, 330
Flounder Pounder, 425, 427
Foley, Jonathan, 58
Foner, Eric, 456
Food & Water Watch, 197, 356
food, 10
declining stocks of, 13
prices of, 9, 239n
sovereignty, 135–36
see also agriculture; famine
food chains, aquatic, 259
food miles, 78
Ford, 67
Ford Foundation, 198
Forest Ethics, 248

forests
carbon sequestering by, 304
clear-cutting of, 296, 304, 310
privatization of, 8
Forster, E. M., 335
Fort Chipewyan, Canada, 327
Fort McKay First Nation, 386
Fort McMurray, Canada, 325–26, 343
Fort St. James, Canada, 380
Fortune, 229
Fort Worth, Tex., 329
fossil fuel economy, 23, 45–46, 121, 173, 456
fossil fuel emissions, see greenhouse gas emissions
fossil fuel era, 266, 311
fossil fuels, 2, 16, 20–21, 90
capitalism and, 176
depletion of, 233
extracted from nature preserves, 192–96
extractivism and, 170
in fertilizers, 134
global economy’s dependence on, 39
and liberation from nature, 173–75
phasing out of, 7, 69, 137–38
regulation of, 71
search for new reserves of, 129–30, 142, 145
for transition to 100% renewables, 214–15
viability of renewable energy vs., 349, 398, 399, 400–401
see also extractive industries
Fox, Josh, 217
Fox, Nick, 245
Fox News, 35, 227
fracking (hydraulic fracturing), 2, 57, 71, 94, 129, 142–43, 144, 147, 213–17, 235n, 237–38, 239, 249, 287,
310, 312–13, 357n, 446, 451
bans and moratoria on, 348
Big Green’s failure to critique, 199–201
earthquakes and, 329
Environmental Defense Fund policy on, 355–56
as exempt from EPA regulations, 328
high risk in, 324
infant health and, 428
local ordinances against, 361, 365
methane emissions from, 143–44, 214, 217, 304
in New York State, 316–17, 361
proposed Europe-wide ban on, 353
public opposition to, see anti-fracking movements
regulations permitting, 145
water required by, 346
water supply contamination from, 328–29, 332, 344, 346
France, 218, 457
anti-fracking movement in, 303–4, 317–18, 335, 348

EDF spying case in, 362
fracking ban in, 318, 348
heat wave of 2003 in, 47
public transit in, 109
Frankenstein (Shelley), 278
Frankfurt, Germany, 97
Fraser River, 345
free-market ideology, 24, 60, 63, 64–95, 121, 173, 284, 291, 465
capacity to respond and, 72–73
carbon reduction and, 21
climate change increased by, 55–56, 412
climate change’s disruption to, 40–44
disasters and, 107
energy subsidies and, 70
Heartland Institute and, 34
and the imagination of the elites, 154, 186
impact of inequality and corruption on, 465
and inability to say no to corporations, 119, 124–25, 141–52
re-municipalization and, 99
Freese, Barbara, 171
free trade agreements, 7, 39, 81
climate movement vs., 64–95, 460
long-distance shipping and, 40, 210
and multiplication of emissions, 80–83
responsibility vs., 48
as threat to democracy, 358–60
free trade zones, in Asia, 19
French Revolution, 177
Frente de Defensa de la Amazonía (Amazon Defense Front), 291
Friedman, David, 237
Friedman, Milton, 44, 62
Friends of the Earth, 84, 197, 201, 213, 356
Friends of the Earth U.K., 250
Friends of Nature (China), 351
Frosch, Robert A., 282
fuel prices, 112
fuel quality standards, 71
Fukushima nuclear disaster, 136, 268
G20 summits, 115
gardening, 93
gas companies, see extractive industries
Gasland, 217, 304
Gass, Heather, 38
Gates, Bill, 135, 235, 236–37, 252, 254, 263, 264, 268–69, 276–77, 280, 281, 289
Gates Foundation, 236
Gauger, Ralf, 100
Gearon, Jihan, 398–99
Gemmill, Faith, 375–76
General Electric, 226

General Motors, 67, 196, 210, 221, 282
Geneva, 6
gentrification, 156
Geoclique, 263, 264, 268–69
geoengineering, 57–58, 154, 236, 255, 256–90, 447
as bridging tool, 257, 281
complexity of biosphere ignored by, 267–68, 290, 422
dangers of, 266–67, 279–80
ethics of, 277
extractive industries and, 281–84
moral hazard and, 261
negative public view of, 290
Royal Society conference on, 256–61, 263–67, 280–81, 284–85, 451
as shock doctrine, 276–78
see also Pinatubo Option; Solar Radiation Management
“Geoengineering: The Horrifying Idea Whose Time Has Come” (forum), 263
geologists, economic, 46
Geophysical Research Letters, 329
George, Russ, 268
Georgia Institute of Technology, 432
Georgia Strait, 374
geothermal energy, 127
Geraghty, Jim, 52
German National Center for Aerospace, Energy and Transport Research (DLR), 138
Germany, 75, 132, 133, 162, 218, 225
energy privatization reversal in, 96–98, 127–28
feed-in tariffs in, 131, 133
growth of dirty coal use in, 136–39, 144, 224
nuclear energy phased out in, 97, 136–38
renewable energy in, 97–98, 130–31, 136–39, 224, 237, 398, 451
travel habits and wealth in, 113
Gerze, Turkey, 349
Gillette, Wyo., 343, 344, 395, 396
Gilman, Nils, 189
Gindin, Sam, 122–23
Gingrich, Newt, 35
glacier melt, 14, 15, 175
global feed-in tariff, 413–14
Global Frackdown, 304
globalization, 22, 64
corporate, 19
dawning of, 18–19
of markets, 39, 85, 171, 412
successes of, 19
Global North, 49, 314
see also developed world; postindustrialized nations
Global Risks report, World Economic Forum, 112
Global South, 53, 77, 181, 309, 314, 412
Blockadia movements in, 412
environmentalism in, 202

see also developing world
global warming, see climate change
Globe and Mail, 325, 333
God’s Last Offer (Ayres), 280
God Species, The (Lynas), 279
gold, mining of, 296
Goldenberg, Suzanne, 312
Golden, KC, 304, 320
Goldman Sachs, 51, 208n, 352
goods, lasting vs. disposable, 85, 90
Gore, Al, 41, 67, 85, 150, 155, 211, 212, 218, 230, 233, 241, 242, 244, 385
government intervention, 42, 43, 178, 201–3
necessity for, 54–55
government regulation:
corruption in, 333–34
laxity of, 330–31, 333
governments, collusion between extractive industries and, 297–99, 303, 306–7, 308, 360, 361–66, 378–80
Grandin, Greg, 455
Grantham, Jeremy, 233
Grantham, Mayo, Van Otterloo & Co., 233
Grantham Foundation for the Protection of the Environment, 233n
Great Barrier Reef, 147–48, 301
Great Depression, 89, 115, 454
Great Transition, 89, 115
Greece, 466
austerity programs in, 9, 108, 131–32, 154
economic problems of, 297
government repression of anti-mining movement in, 297–98, 303
oil and gas exploration in, 22, 181–82
Skouries forest mining project in, 293–94, 296–98, 303, 314, 342, 347, 445
WTO challenges brought against, 65
Green for All, 92
Green Alliance, U.K., 90
green consumerism, 211–13
“green deserts,” 180
green energy entrepreneurs, free market and, 69–70
Green Energy and Green Economy Act, 66–69
green energy programs, trade law challenges to, 64–65, 68–69
green fascism, 54
Greenhouse Development Rights framework, 417–18
greenhouse effect, 74, 213
greenhouse gas emissions, 6, 64–65, 90, 198, 219, 259
computer models of, 270
cost of, 112
countries’ responsibility for internal, 79
cumulative effect of, 21, 40, 56, 175, 409–10, 416
decreased work hours as offset to, 94
deregulation and, 210
distorted global picture of, 79, 411–12
fracking and, 129, 143–44, 214, 217, 304

free trade and, 80–83
global gas boom and, 143–44
globalized agriculture and, 77–78
increase in, 20, 452
low wages and high, 81–82
reduction of, see emission reduction
from shipping, 76, 79
standards for, 25
WTO regulations and, 71
see also carbon emissions
Greenland:
extraction industry in, 385
melting ice sheet in, 12, 148, 385
green NGOs, geoengineering and, 264, 280
Green Party (New Brunswick), 374
Greenpeace, 84, 156, 197, 199, 201, 205, 233n, 264, 356
anti-drilling protests of, 300
EDF spying on, 362
Greenpeace U.K., 376
green technology, 85, 87, 89–90
for developing world, 76, 85
investment in, 89, 156, 400–407, 451
green towns, 406–7
Greenwich, University of, 101
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), 92
Grunwald, Michael, 124
Guarani, 221
Guardian, 149, 312, 346, 363–64, 383
Guay, Justin, 352
Gulf Restoration Network, 425
Gupta, Sanjay, 430
Guujaaw, 368–69, 383
Haida Gwaii, 369
Haida Nation, land claims of, 368–69
Haimen, China, 350
Hair, Jay, 84, 191
Haiti, 457
Haiyan, Typhoon, 107, 175, 406
Halkidiki, Greece, 294, 342, 445
Halliburton, 330
Halliburton Loophole, 328
Hällström, Niclas, 413–14
Halstead Property, 51
Hamburg, Germany, 96–97
Hamilton, Clive, 89, 175, 264
Hansen, James, 22, 41, 73, 140
Hansen, Wiebke, 97
Harper administration (Canada), 302–3, 362
environmental protections weakened by, 381–82

“war on science” of, 326–28
Harter, John, 313
Harvard Medical School, 105
Harvard University, 81, 354–55
Hauper, Debbi, 373
Have You Ever Seen a Moose?, 26–27
Hawking, Stephen, 288
Hayes, Chris, 455, 456
Heartland Institute, 38, 40, 41, 63, 72, 210n, 211, 228n, 235, 451
billboard campaign of, 41–42, 50–51
Center on Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate at, 50–51
climate conferences of, 43, 204, 286n, 394
corporate funding of, 44–45
Sixth International Conference on Climate Change (ICCC) of 2011, 31–35, 38, 39–40, 43, 45, 47,
53n, 59–60, 91, 119, 142
Heathrow, protests against new runway at, 249–50
heating prices, 112
heat waves, 13–14
Heiltsuk First Nation, 338–42, 363
Heinz Endowments, 216
Henderson, Jonathan, 425–26, 427
Heritage Foundation, 39
heritage trust funds, 112–13
Hernández Navarro, Luis, 464–65
herring, 338–39, 425
Hertsgaard, Mark, 141–42
high-density living, 91
Highway 12, big rigs on, 318–19, 342, 370
highway system, national, 124
Hillman, Tim, 99
Hiroshima, atomic bombing of, 277–78
Hochschild, Adam, 456
homeostasis, quest for, 446–47
Honduras, 222
honeybees, 439
Hong Kong, 13
“Honour the Treaties” (Neil Young tour), 383–84
Hopi, 398
Hoquiam, Wash., 349
hormones, 421, 424
chemical disruption of, 429, 433, 436, 439
Horn of Africa, 47
Horner, Chris, 32, 34, 45, 228n, 411
House of Representatives, U.S., 35
Energy and Environment Subcommittee of, 47
housing, 92
affordable, 7, 40, 91, 156, 157
energy-efficient, 91
retrofitting of, 122
sizes of, 90

subsidized, 10
Housing Authority, New York City, 104, 105n Houston, Tex., 47
Housty, Jess, 338, 339, 341–42
Howarth, Robert, 143, 217
Howell, Lord, 313
Huanca, Nilda Rojas, 161
Hudson’s Bay, 435
Hugo, Victor, 29
human reproduction, 419–30
human rights, 177, 197, 453
in international law, 167
human rights abuses, “green,” 222–23
Human Rights Watch, 308
humans:
in dominion over nature, 41, 75, 177, 186
as “God Species,” 279, 289, 395
Hungary, 75
hunger, 100, 135
hurricanes, 4, 9, 14, 47n, 105, 107, 108, 404, 407
hybrid cars, 35
hydraulic fracturing, see fracking
hydrocarbons, 237
metabolizing of, 433
reserves of, 150
hydroelectric power, 97, 100, 182
Iceland, 243
ice shelves, 176
Ickes, Harold, 293
Idaho, 318, 370
Idaho Rivers United, 319
Idle No More movement, 381–82, 397
Ierissos, Greece, 295, 298
Ijaw Nation, 307–8, 309, 370
Ijaw Youth Council, 307–8
immigration, 49, 156
Imperial Oil, 145
incentives, 18, 136–39
income, guaranteed basic, 26, 461
Inconvenient Truth, An (film), 150, 211, 212, 230
independence movements, 454, 455
Independent, 416
India, 5, 24, 55, 75, 82, 88n, 175, 202
anti-coal movement in, 350
carbon emissions from, 409–10, 411, 412
coolant factories in, 219–20
fast-growing economy of, 40, 152
starvation in, 135
wealth in, 114
WTO challenges brought against, 65, 68, 70, 126

WTO challenges brought by, 65
Indian Affairs Bureau, U.S., 396
Indigenous Environmental Network, 318, 332
Indigenous Network on Economies and Trade, 367
Indigenous peoples, 67, 181, 200
in Blockadia movement, 139, 177, 373–74, 380–84, 443–45
carbon cowboys’ preying on, 220–21
children of, in church-run schools, 339, 379
climate debt of developed countries to, 387, 388–99, 408
pipelines and, 315, 319, 344–45
pushed out of own preserved land, 183, 221–23
socioeconomic disenfranchisement of, 384–87, 391–92
ways of life of, 370–71; see also worldview, regenerative see also First Nations; specific peoples
Indigenous peoples, land rights of, 7, 26, 182, 365–66, 367–87, 418
anti-tar sands movement and, 322
Canadian Supreme Court upholding of, 368, 371–72
climate change and, 380–84, 385
conflict with non-Natives over, 371–74
government and corporate opposition to, 369–70, 381–82
as impetus for uniting of Indigenous peoples and non-Natives, 373–74, 380–84
land-sharing provisions in, 372
lawsuits over, 368, 371–72, 378–80, 384, 386, 451
as routinely ignored, 377–78
Standard & Poor’s and, 367–69, 383
trumped by socioeconomic power of extractive industries, 384–87
individualism, 36, 48, 56–57, 462
industrialized nations, see developed world
Industrial Revolution, 18, 25, 157, 175–76, 177, 409
colonialism and, 171, 175, 457
slavery and, 415–16
steam engine in, 171–73
infertility, in humans:
environmental damage and, 424–25, 428–30
stress and, 437
infertility, in marine life:
BP spill and, 431–33
climate change and, 433–34
infrastructures:
energy-related, 23
investment in, 108–9, 454
transportation, 85, 124, 127, 318–19, 342, 370; see also railways urban, 51, 122
Ingraffea, Anthony, 214
Inner Mongolia, anti-coal movement in, 300
Institute for Local Self-Reliance, 99–100, 209
Institute for Marine Mammal Studies (IMMS), 432–33
Institute for Policy Studies, 224
insurance, 234
disaster, 109–10
profit motive and, 49–51, 105
Intellectual Ventures, 262, 264, 289

Inter-American Court of Human Rights, 376
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 33, 39, 73–74, 79, 80, 143, 150, 152
Interior Department, U.S., 333, 375–76
International Development Department, U.K., 87
International Energy Agency (IEA), 23, 59, 100, 152
warming report of, 14–15
World Energy Outlook report of, 147
International Labour Organization, 127
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 81
austerity policies promoted by, 77
on carbon tax, 114
free-market ideology and, 62
international trade, 26, 64–73, 76–77
climate protection and, 77
exporting of dirty production in, 79
see also free trade agreements
Intervale, 404–5
Inuit, 375
Inupiat, 375–76
investment:
in extractive industries, 235–37, 352
in infrastructures, 108–9, 454
socially responsible, 402–3
see also divestment movement; green technology, investment in
in vitro fertilization (IVF), 421
Iran, 454
Irene, Hurricane, 108, 404
Isaacs, Mark, 167
“Is Earth F**ked?” (Werner), 449–50
Ishpingo oil field, 410
island states, low-lying, 12
Istanbul, 23, 157
Italy, 65, 154, 225
Ithaca, N.Y., 316–17
Ithaca College, 317
Jackson, Tim, 93
Jackson, Wes, 438, 439–40, 446
Jacobin, 94
Jacobson, Mark Z., 101, 102, 137, 214–15
Jacques, Peter, 38
Jakarta, 223
James, Jewell Praying Wolf, 323
Japan, 68, 69
Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission, 65
Jevons, William Stanley, 29
job creation, 70, 93, 118, 121, 126–28, 141, 154, 237–38
Johnson, Lyndon B., 73, 261
Jonah Field, 215
Jones, Mary Harris “Mother,” 367

Jones, Van, 156
Jordan, John, 405
Jost, John T., 57
Journal of Geophysical Research, 270
JP Morgan, 215
Juhasz, Antonia, 111–12
Kaczynski, Ted, 41–42
Kahan, Dan, 36–37, 56–57
Kaiama, Nigeria, 307
Kaiama Declaration, 307–8
Kakarapalli, India, 350
Kalamazoo River, 331, 338
Karoo, South Africa, 347
Kartha, Sivan, 388, 465
Kasser, Tim, 60
Katmai eruption (1912), 273–74
Katrina, Hurricane, 4, 9, 47n, 105, 407, 465
Kearl open-pit mine, 145, 147
Keeter, Scott, 35
Keith, David, 247, 254, 263, 268, 269, 275, 280, 281
Kennedy, Robert, Jr., 356n
Kenya, 109, 202
Kernza, 440
Kerry, John, 34, 225
Keynes, John Maynard, 178
Keynesianism, 38, 75, 125
growth and, 178
Keystone XL pipeline, 139–41, 149, 197, 205, 237, 245, 302–3, 312
campaign against, 301–3, 304, 318, 323–24, 359, 403
eminent domain laws and, 361
Indigenous land rights violated by, 375
landowner suits against, 313, 361
Ogallala Aquifer route of, 346
Khor, Martin, 77
Kibale National Park, 222
Kilimanjaro Energy, 247
killifish, BP oil spill and, 432
Kinder Morgan, 217
King, Jeff, 395, 396
King, Lucas, 397
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 449, 453
Kintisch, Eli, 263
Kitimat, Canada, 302
Kivalina, 112
Klare, Michael T., 320
Klaus, Václav, 42–43
Klein, Naomi (author):
ecological despair of, 419–20
fertility crisis of, 420–25, 427, 436–37, 441–42

pregnancy and childbirth of, 419, 440, 448
Kliegerman, Stephen G., 51
Knight, Alan, 246, 252–53
Koch, Charles and David, 44, 45, 227
Koch Industries, 44
Koenig, Kevin, 411
Koonin, Steven, 282
Krupp, Fred, 191, 207–8, 226–29, 356n Kyoto Protocol, 69, 76, 77, 79, 150, 165, 218–19
labor, 176, 177
cheap, 81–83
cooperative, 122–23
in Industrial Revolution, 171
public sector, 157
labor movement, see trade unions
Laboucan-Massimo, Melina, 322
Labrador, 348
Lac-Mégantic, Canada, oil train disaster at, 311–12, 332, 333
LaDuke, Winona, 443
laissez-faire economics, see free-market ideology
Laki eruption (1783), 273
Lakota Nation, 375
Lame Deer, Mont., 390, 395
Lameman, Al, 378–79
Lameman, Crystal, 379
Lamkin, John, 426
Lander, Edgardo, 363
land ethic, 184
Land Institute, 438, 439–40
land management, 91
land rights, of Indigenous peoples, see Indigenous peoples, land rights of
Lane, Lee, 282–83
Lang, Chris, 223
Lasch, Christopher, 117
Latin America:
colonial land grabs in, 414
overdependence on resource extraction in, 179–82
Latour, Bruno, 278–79
Laval, Canada, 313
La Via Campesina, 134
Lawson, Nigel, 42
Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, 314
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) standards, 406
lead particulates, 203
Leard State Forest (Australia), 301
Lee, Marc, 112
left wing:
climate change and, 63
extractivism and, 178–82
political potential of climate change ignored by, 157
traditional institutions of, 158

legislation, environmental, 141, 150–51
Lehrer, Eli, 50–51, 234
Leidreiter, Anna, 97
Leopold, Aldo, 184–85
Levitt, Steven D., 262–63, 271–72
Lewis, Wayne, 64
Liberal Party (Canadian), 36
liberals, climate change and, 61–62, 156
Li Bo, 351, 352
Liepert, Ron, 312
lifestyle changes, 4, 17–18, 91
Lifton, Robert Jay, 57
Limits to Growth (Club of Rome), 185–86, 207
Lipow, Gar, 113
liquid nature, 223–24
Little Red, 242
Liverpool, 172
Living in Denial (Norgaard), 462
LNG (liquefied natural gas), 376
local hiring, 92
local power, 96
local production, 7, 68–70, 71, 76, 85–86
of food, 90, 134–35, 222, 404–5
London, 13, 148, 172
Lone Pine Resources, 358–59
long-haul transportation, 83, 84, 85
long-range planning, 95, 124–26
and jobs, 126–28
for power, 128–36
Longueuil, Canada, 313
Los Angeles, Calif., 13
Los Angeles Times, 272, 300
Losing Ground (Dowie), 84, 203
Louisiana, 330, 431
Love Canal Homeowners Association, 206
Lovell, Evan, 239, 240
Lovelock, James, 231
love of place, in Blockadia movement, 337–66
low-carbon economy, 16, 21, 91, 93
for developing world, 76
infrastructure in, 72, 124
low-consumption activities, 93–94
Lower Elwah Klallam, 374–75
Lubicon Lake First Nation, 322
Lukacs, Martin, 383
Lula da Silva, Luiz Inácio, 179
Lummi Nation, 322–23, 370, 374, 389
Lynas, Mark, 279
Lynchburg, Va., 333

Maccario, Paolo, 65–66, 68–69
McClendon, Aubrey, 312, 356
McCright, Aaron, 46–47
MacDonald, Christine, 189
McDonald’s, 196, 208
McIntosh, Alastair, 210
McKibben, Bill, 139–40, 148, 353–54, 404
Madagascar, 220, 221–22
Madrid, 157
Maegaard, Preben, 132
Magna, 68
Maher, Bill, 137
Maine, 435
malaria, 109
Malawi, agroecology in, 135
Maldives, 13
Mali, 270
Maliseet First Nation, 371–72
Malm, Andreas, 80–81, 172, 394
Manchester, England, 172, 300
Manhattan Project, 278
Manne, Robert, 41
Mann, Michael, 55–56, 107
Manuel, Arthur, 367–69, 383
Mao Zedong, 178
Marcellus Shale, 312, 328
marine life:
climate change and, 433–35
food chain in, 259
impact of Deepwater Horizon spill on, 425–26, 431–34, 451
impact of Exxon Valdez oil spill on, 337–39
oceanic acidification and, 259, 434
Marine Stewardship Council, 209
markets:
carbon, 211
cyclical nature of, 225
expansion of, 171
limits of, 136–39, 142
see also free-market ideology
Marom, Yotam, 153
Mars, terraforming of, 288
Marshall, Donald, Jr., 372
Marshall, George, 213
Marshall decision, 371–72, 374
Marshall Plan for the Earth, 5–7, 40
Martínez, Esperanza, 176, 304, 408–9
Marx, Karl, 177
materialism, 25, 60
Matsés people, 220–21
Maules Creek mining project, 300–301

Maxmin, Chloe, 354
May, Brendan, 249n
Means, Landon, 395
meat, demand for, 14
media:
climate change denial and, 34
elite control over, 18, 369–70
Meeting Environmental Challenges (Kasser and Crompton), 60
Melbourne, Australia, 446
Melbourne, University of, Energy Institute of, 102
Men’s Health, 429
Merchant, Carolyn, 395
Merchants of Doubt (film), 42
mercury, 176, 203
Merkel, Angela, 136, 141, 218
Mesoamerica, 439
methane, 15, 143–44, 214, 217, 222, 304
in water supply, 328–29, 332
Métis, 371
Mexico, 19, 68, 81, 82, 84, 202
Zapatista uprising in, 182
Mexico, Gulf of, 147, 330
see also BP, Deepwater Horizon disaster of
Meyer, Alden, 200–201
Miami University, 401
Michaels, Patrick, 32, 33, 45, 47, 48, 142
Michigan, Enbridge pipeline rupture in, 331–32, 338
Microsoft, 237
migrants, 154, 166–67
climate refugees, 7
Mi’kmaq, 299, 303, 371–74, 381
Mi’kmaq Warrior Society, 373
military budgets, 114
military, U.S., petroleum consumed by, 113
Mill, John Stuart, 178
Millennium Pipeline, 317
Miller, Colin, 157
Mills, Christina, 313
Minerals Management Service, 333–34
mining, 91n, 173, 176
mountaintop removal, 303, 309, 310, 329, 353
open-pit, 180, 296, 325, 329, 348, 445
see also specific projects
Minisink, N.Y., 317
Minnesota, 27
Minnesota, University of, Institute on the Environment at, 58
miscarriages, environmental toxins linked to, 424–25, 429, 439
Mississippi, 431
Mississippi River:
drought of 2012 in, 2–3

flooding of 2011 in, 3
Mississippi River Delta, ecological damage in, 425–26
Mitchell, Stacy, 209
Mobil, 192
Mohave Generating Station, 398
Mohit, Nastaran, 103–5
Molina, Patricia, 182
Monbiot, George, 363–64
Monsanto, 9, 80, 135, 196
monsoons, 268, 269, 270, 273–74, 287
Montana, 53n, 318, 370, 381
coal mining in, 320, 342–43, 346, 370, 388–93, 395, 397, 445
Environmental Quality Department of, 397
State Land Board of, 389
Monterey Shale, 347
Montreal, Canada, 313
Montreal, Maine & Atlantic railroad, 333
Montreal Protocol on ozone depletion, 220
moose, disappearance of, 26–27
Morales, Evo, 180–81
moral hazard, geoengineering and, 261
moral imperative:
in abolition movement, 462–63
in climate movement, 336, 386–87, 464
divestment movement and, 354–55
in social movements, 462, 463–64
Morano, Marc, 32, 34, 45
Morton, Oliver, 259
Mosaddegh, Mohammad, 454
Moses, Marlene, 64, 449
Mossville, La., 429–30
Mother Earth, see Earth Mother/Mother Earth concept
Mount Elgon National Park, 222
Movement Generation, 448
Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People (MOSOP), 306
Mueller, Tadzio, 138
Muir, John, 183–84, 211
Mukherji, Joydeep, 368–69
multinational corporations:
cheapest labor force and, 81–82
export-led development and, 82, 412
Mumbai, 13
Munich, Germany, 97
Murdoch, Rupert, 35
Myhrvold, Nathan, 262, 264, 269, 277, 280, 281
Nagasaki, atomic bombing of, 277–78
Narain, Sunita, 96, 414
NASA, 14, 152
earth-from-space photographs by, 286

Goddard Institute for Space Studies at, 22, 73
NatCen Social Research, 117
Nation, 420
National Academy of Sciences, U.S., 152, 282
National Association of Manufacturers, 227
National Audubon Society, 84
National Center for Atmospheric Research, 272
National Energy Board, Canada, 362
National Environment Appellate Authority, India, 350
National Guard, 103
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), U.S., 102, 426, 432–33, 434, 436
national security, 49
National Toxics Campaign, 206
National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers, 253
National Wildlife Federation, 84, 185, 191, 226, 390, 393
Native American cosmologies, 184
natural gas, 67, 102, 219
Big Green’s advocacy of, 199–201, 235n, 236
as bridge fuel, 128–30, 211, 213–14, 252, 257, 287
climate benefits of, 144n
conventional, 215
flaring of, 305–6
fracking and, see fracking
renewables displaced by, 44n, 128–30, 214–16, 252
for vehicles, 237
Willett’s support for, 235–36
natural gas industry:
Sierra Club and, 197
strategic miscalculations by, 316–17
Natural Resource Partners, 349
Natural Resources Defense Council, 84, 115, 198, 205, 213, 226, 325, 357
Move America Beyond Oil campaign, 231
Nature, 37, 259
nature:
delayed response of, 175
fertility cycle of, 438–39, 446–48
legal rights of, 443–45
steam power and freedom from, 172–74
Nature Climate Change, 290
Nature Conservancy, 191–95, 196, 206, 208n, 210, 212n, 226, 233n, 355
Business Council of, 196
fracking supported by, 215
oil and gas drilling by, 192–95, 196, 206, 215, 451
Paraná offset and, 221, 222
Nauru, 64, 161–69, 175, 187, 221n, 311
Australian offshore refugee detention center on, 166–67
independence of, 162
phosphate of lime in, 162–63
Navajo, 398–99
Navarro Llanos, Angélica, 5–7, 40, 409

Navigable Waters Protection Act, gutting of, 381–82
Nebraska, 403
Nelson, Gaylord, 153
neoliberalism, 39, 43, 72–73, 80, 131, 132, 154, 158, 466
Netherlands, 99
anti-fracking movement in, 348
divestment movement in, 354
neuropathy, 436, 438
“New Abolitionism, The” (Hayes), 455
New America Foundation, 263
New Atlantis (Bacon), 266
New Brunswick:
anti-fracking campaign in, 299, 303, 370, 373–74, 381
Indigenous rights conflict in, 371–74
oil train explosion in, 333
New Deal, 10, 453, 454
New Democratic Party (Canadian), 36
New England, 441
New Era Colorado, 98
New Era Windows Cooperative, 123n
Newfoundland, anti-fracking movement in, 348
New Green Revolution, 135
New Jersey, Superstorm Sandy in, 53
New New Deal (Grunwald), 124
New Orleans, La., 4, 9, 53, 105, 407
New South Wales, anti-coal movement in, 300–301, 376
New York, N.Y., 13, 63, 103–6, 157
Bloomberg as mayor of, 235
disaster infrastructure in, 51
New Yorkers Against Fracking, 214
New York State:
anti-fracking ordinances in, 361, 365
fracking in, 316–17
fracking moratorium in, 348
renewable power plan for, 102
Superstorm Sandy in, 53, 405
New York Times, 333, 411
New York Times Magazine, 286
New Zealand, 163, 182, 290
Nexen, 246
Nez Perce, 319, 370
Nicaragua, 348n
Niger, 270
Niger Delta, 197, 219
government repression of anti-oil movements in, 306–7, 308, 370
oil extraction in, 305–9, 358
Nigeria, 219, 305
carbon emissions of, 305
colonial heritage of, 370
political unrest in, 308–9, 358

Nile River, volcanic eruptions and, 273
Nilsson, David, 220–21
9/11, 6, 63
Nixon, Richard, 125
Nixon, Rob, 276
Nompraseurt, Torm, 321
nonbinding agreements, at Copenhagen, 12, 13–14, 150
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), 362
geoengineering and, 264, 280
Norgaard, Kari, 462
Norse Energy Corporation USA, 365
North Africa, 274
North America, 182
emissions from, 40
program cuts in, 110
wealth in, 114
World War II rationing in, 115–16
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), 19, 71, 76, 78, 83–85, 358–59
North Dakota, Bakken formation in, 71
Northern Cheyenne, 322–23, 346, 370, 386, 389–93, 399
traditional values of, 391–92
unemployment among, 391
Northern Cheyenne Reservation, 322, 389, 390, 397, 408
fire on, 396
solar heaters for, 393–96
Northern Gateway pipeline, 312, 362, 381
campaign against, 302, 337–42, 344–45, 365–66, 367, 380
cost of, 400
Joint Review Panel for, 337–42, 363, 365
North Texas, University of, 312
North Vancouver, Canada, 323
Norway, 99, 130, 179, 198
Nova Scotia, 371
npower, 149
nuclear holocaust, 15
nuclear power, 57, 58, 97, 118, 131, 199, 202, 205
Germany’s phasing out of, 97, 136–38
“next generation” technologies for, 137n, 236
in the wake of Fukushima, 136
Obama, Barack, 12, 227, 392, 412
“all of the above” energy policy of, 22, 302, 304–5
environmental agenda of, 45, 118, 120–21, 141–42
and fossil fuel industry, 141
health care law of, 105, 125, 151, 227
and Keystone XL, 140–41, 403
responses to financial crisis by, 120–26
support for biofuels by, 32
Occupy Sandy, 103–5, 406
Occupy Wall Street, 103, 153, 206, 464

Oceana, 330–31
oceans, 175
acidification of, 165, 259, 434
dead zones in, 439
iron “fertilization” in, 257, 258, 268, 279
see also marine life
O’Connor, John, 327
Office of Price Administration, 115
offshore drilling, 22, 80, 144
deepwater, 2, 142, 300, 310, 324
lifting of limits on, 145
see also Arctic drilling; BP, Deepwater Horizon disaster of
Ogallala Aquifer, 346
Ogoni, Ogoniland, 306, 309, 370
oil, 102, 128, 215
Oil Change International, 115
oil industry, 197
political and economic power of, 316
public ownership of, 130
and drop in conventional production, 147
see also extractive industries
Oil Sands Leadership Initiative (OSLI), 246
Ojo, Godwin Uyi, 306, 309
Okanagan, land claims of, 368
O’Neill, Gerard, 288
One Million Climate Jobs, 127
Ontario, 56, 382
feed-in tariffs in, 67, 133
local content provision challenged in, 68–70, 71, 99, 126
renewable energy sector in, 66–69
Oomittuk, Steve, 375
Operation Climate Change, 307–8
opposition movements, 9–10
see also Blockadia; climate movement
Oregon, 319, 320, 349
Oreskes, Naomi, 42
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 114–15
Orwell, George, 96
Osuoka, Isaac, 307–8
Otter Creek, Mont., 322–23, 389, 397
Our Hamburg—Our Grid coalition, 96–97
oysters, 431–32, 434
ozone depletion, 16
Pacala, Stephen, 113
Pacific Northwest:
ecological values of, 319–20
proposed coal export terminals in, 320, 322, 346, 349, 370, 374
Pacific Ocean, acidification of, 434
Paine, Tom, 314

Palin, Sarah, 1
palm oil plantations, 222
Papanikolaou, Marilyn, 361
Papua New Guinea, 200, 220
Paradise Built in Hell (Solnit), 62–63
Paraná, Brazil, 221, 222
Parenti, Christian, 49, 186
Parfitt, Ben, 129
Paris, public transit in, 109
Parkin, Scott, 296
Parr, Michael, 227
particulate pollution, 176
Passamaquoddy First Nation, 371–72
Patel, Raj, 136
Patles, Suzanne, 381
Paulson, Henry, 49
Peabody Energy, 391
Pearl River Delta, 82
Pelosi, Nancy, 35
Pendleton, Oreg., 319
Peninsula Hospital Center, 104
Penn State Earth System Science Center, 55
Pennsylvania:
fracking in, 357n
Homeland Security Office of, 362
water pollution in, 328–29
Pensacola, Fla., 431
permafrost, 176
Peru, 78, 220–21
pest outbreaks, 14
Petrobras, 130
PetroChina, 130
Pew Center on Global Climate Change, 226
Pew Research Center for People & the Press, 35
Philippines, 107, 109
Phillips, Wendell, 463
phosphate of lime, 163–64, 166
photovoltaic manufacturing, 66
Pickens, T. Boone, 237–38, 252
Pickens Plan, 237
Pierre River Mine, 379–80, 383
Piketty, Thomas, 113, 154–55
Pinatubo eruption (1991), 258–59
weather effects of, 259, 270, 271–72, 274
Pinatubo Option, 258, 259–62, 274
famine and drought as consequences of, 270, 279, 287
solar power generation affected by, 259
termination problem in, 260
weather patterns affected by, 260, 268, 270–71
Pine Ridge Reservation, 393, 396

pipelines, 141, 157, 349, 352, 362, 413, 446
as common threat, 315–16
Indigenous peoples and, 315, 319, 344–45
public value of renewable energy projects vs., 400

see also specific pipeline projects
Pittsburgh, Pa., rights of nature ordinance in, 444
place, love of, in Blockadia movement, 337–66
planetary exodus, 288–89
planned obsolescence, 91
planning, long-range, see long-range planning
Point Carbon, 225
Point Hope, Alaska, 375
Poland, 75, 144, 200, 225
polar bears, 435
Policy Implications of Greenhouse Warming, 282
Polis, Jared, 314
politicians, responsibility evaded by, 12, 119
politics, elite control over, 18, 119
polluter pays principle, 110–19, 202–3
pollution regulations, 39
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), 203, 429
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), 426
Pooley, Eric, 207, 208
Pope, Alexander, 446
Pope, Carl, 237, 356, 357n population, 14, 114n
populism, 117
postindustrialized nations, 79, 132, 177, 387, 460
poverty, 7, 19, 61, 85, 110, 115, 119, 134–36, 157, 177, 343, 455, 458
consumption and, 91
in developing world, 40, 55, 88n, 179–82, 409, 416, 418
extractive industries and, 181–82, 416
lack of protection and, 49
renewable energy and, 391, 399
Powder River Basin, coal mines in, 320, 323, 343–44, 395
power, corporate, 25
Power Past Coal, 349
power plants, coal-fired, see coal-fired power plants
precautionary principle, 335–36
Premier Gold Mines, 382
Presidential Oil Spill Commission, 330
President’s Science Advisory Committee, climate change report of, 261
price controls, 125
PricewaterhouseCoopers, 15
Princeton Environmental Institute, 113
Princeton University, Carbon Mitigation Initiative of, 113–14
Prince William Sound, impact of Exxon Valdez oil spill in, 337–39, 426
privatization, 8, 9, 39, 72
diminished services under, 128
of disaster response, 51–52
of former Soviet economies, 19
and infrastructure investments, 108–9
as license to steal, 154
of public sphere, 19–20
reversals of, 39, 95, 96–103

Prize, The (Yergin), 311
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 79, 217, 328n “proof of harmlessness,” 271, 272
propane, 328
Prosperity Without Growth (Jackson), 93
protectionism, 64–65, 84
Public Accountability Initiative, 216
Public Citizen, 80, 213
Global Trade Watch of, 359–60
public health systems, 10, 109
public infrastructure, 19, 20
public sector, 95
crumbling institutions, 158
green energy and, 97–103, 406–7
and infrastructure investments, 108–9
spending cuts in, 19, 72, 110
public services, zero-carbon, 19–20
public transit, 7, 40, 92, 93, 108, 121, 124, 126, 127
in Brazil, 157
cheap, 91
in France, 109
in wartime, 16–17
public works, 39
Pungesti, Romania, anti-fracking movement in, 298–99, 303, 347, 404
quantitative easing, 110
Quebec:
anti-fracking movement in, 303–4, 313, 348, 358–59
fracking moratorium in, 71
opposition movements in, 9, 464
Queensland, 27, 301
racism:
environmental, 205, 429
sacrifice zones and, 310–11, 314
railways, 91, 108, 122, 133
coal transport by, 234, 362, 389, 397
high-speed, 126
oil transport by, 311–12, 325, 332, 333
Rainforest Action Network, 197, 296, 356
“Rainforest Chernobyl,” 309, 378
Rakotomanga, Cressant, 221–22
Rand, Ayn, 44
Rasch, Phil, 264
rationing, wartime, 115–16
Raytheon, 9
Read, Joe, 53n
Reagan, Ronald, 39, 117, 203–5, 229
real estate:
disaster infrastructure and, 51
in wake of Superstorm Sandy, 9, 235n

re-communalization, 96–103
Red Cloud, Henry, 24, 393–97
Red Cloud Renewable Energy Center, 396
REDD-Monitor, 223
RedGE, 78
Red Hook, Brooklyn, 105n, 405
Reilly, John, 11
reinsurance, 9, 234
religion, and dominion over nature, 41, 74, 177
re-municipalization, 96–103
renewable energy, 16, 18, 67, 90, 93, 127, 131, 218, 253, 283
Asia and, 349–50
buy-local programs for, 77
cheap natural gas as undercutting, 128–29
community ownership of, 398–99
Gates’ dismissal of, 236–37
in Germany, 97–98, 130–31
incentives for, 138–39
investment in, see green technology, investment in
major oil companies and, 111–12
maturing technology for, 213–14
misleading cautions on, 199–200, 394–95
noncorporate providers of, 131
100 percent, 101, 102, 137, 214–15
private sector and, 100–101
public ownership and, 97–103
public sector and, 97–103, 406–7
public value of, extractive projects vs., 400
in Spain, 110
transition to, 89, 97–103, 115, 214–15, 364
and variability of natural systems, 394–95
as viable alternative to fossil fuels, 349, 398, 399, 400–401, 403, 413–18
WTO’s slowing of, 71–72
reparations, 414–15
see also climate debt
REPOWERBalcombe, 403–4
Republican party, 35, 118, 125, 141, 204
climate change denial and, 34, 36, 46, 407
Republic Windows and Doors, 123n
resilience, 419, 442
Resisting Environmental Destruction on Indigenous Lands (REDOIL), 375–76
resources, depletion of, 450
Responsible Endowments Coalition, 401
Reyes, Oscar, 224
Richmond, Calif., 321, 402
right wing:
as barrier to progress, 31–63, 75, 124
on climate change as left-wing plot, 31, 32, 156, 411
Rignot, Eric, 14
Rio Earth Summit of 1992, 55, 76, 77, 83, 85, 150, 200, 293, 363

Risky Business project, 49
Roberts, David, 364–65
Robertsbridge Group, 249n
Robertson, Julian, 208
Robock, Alan, 264, 270, 273–74
Rockaways, 103–6
Rodríguez, Heriberto, 222
Rogers, Jim, 196
Romania:
fracking in, 298–99, 303, 344
government repression of environmental protest in, 298–99, 303
Romm, Joe, 54
Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 121
Roosevelt, Theodore, 211
Rosebud Sioux, 375
Rothschild, Richard, 31, 34
rotifers, BP oil spill and, 432
Rousseff, Dilma, 179
Rowe, Stan, 444
Royal Canadian Mounted Police, 299
Royal Society, 152, 266
Chicheley Hall geoengineering conference of, 256–61, 263–67, 280–81, 284–85, 451
royalties, on oil, gas, and coal extraction, 112–13
Roy, Arundhati, 291
Ruffalo, Mark, 317
Russia:
Greenpeace activists arrested by, 300
oil and gas companies in, 178–79
see also Soviet Union
Sacramento, Calif., 99
sacrifice zones, 172–73, 310–15
Safe Drinking Water Act, 328
Safety and Environmental Enforcement Bureau, U.S., 332
Sahel, 270, 274, 275–76
Sainsbury, 116
St. Lawrence River, 359
Salina, Kans., 438
salmon, 338–39, 345, 375, 440–41, 448
Salvation Army, 167
Sami, 375
San Andrés, Providencia, and Santa Catalina province, Colombia, 348
Sancton, Thomas, 74
Sand County Almanac (Leopold), 184
Sandy, Superstorm, 3–4, 9, 51, 103–8, 175, 405, 406, 446, 465
Koch attempt to block federal aid for, 53
Sanford C. Bernstein & Co., 358
San Francisco, Calif., 354
Santa Barbara oil spill of 1969, 201
Santorum, Rick, 312

Sarnia, Canada, 428
Saro-Wiwa, Ken, 306, 307, 309
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 176
Sauven, John, 376
Save the Fraser Declaration, 344–45, 365
Savitz, Jackie, 330–31
Sawyer, Diane, 391
Scaife, Richard Mellon, 45
scallops, 434
Schapiro, Mark, 222
Schmitt, Harrison, 32, 286n
Schwacke, Lori, 433
science, climate, 46, 59, 127, 152, 158
Science, 329
Science Advisory Committee, 73
Scientific Revolution, 170, 177, 266
Scott, Mike, 381, 389–90, 445
sea levels, 13, 270
sea star wasting syndrome, 27–28
Seattle, Wash., 354
sea turtles, 434
seawalls, 10
SEC, 148
Senate, U.S., 227
Senegal, 270
Sering, Mary Ann Lucille, 276
Shah, Jigar, 199, 239
shale, fracking of, 142–43, 144, 147, 214
shale gas, 298–99, 346, 357n water supply contamination from, 328–29
shale oil, 311, 346, 357n Shanghai, China, 13, 351
shareholders, 111, 112, 128, 129, 146–47, 148, 150, 252
Sheeran, Kristen, 401, 402
Shell, 111, 226, 238, 246
Arctic drilling operations of, 332, 333, 358, 375–76
diminished profits of, 358
fracking operations of, 347
green groups funding and, 196, 198, 217, 229
Niger Delta oil operations of, 306–7, 358
offshore drilling by, 145–46
Pierre River Mine project of, 379–80, 383
reserve-replacement ratio of, 147
Shelley, Mary, 278
shipping industry, 113
emissions from, 76, 79
Shiva, Vandana, 284
shock doctrine, 8–10
geoengineering as, 276–78
Shock Doctrine (Klein), 8, 10
shrimp, BP spill and, 431
Shrybman, Steven, 72, 77–78

Sierra Club, 10, 84, 86, 156, 183, 197, 211, 235–36, 237, 325, 356–57, 381, 389–90
“Beyond Coal” campaign of, 349, 397
divestment movement and, 357
International Climate Program of, 352
Sierra Club BC, 365
Silent Spring (Carson), 185, 201
Silfab Ontario, 65–66, 68–69, 122, 126
Silfab SpA, 66, 68–69
Simon, Gary, 374
Simpson, Leanne, 442–43
Sinclair, Scott, 70
Sinclair, Upton, 46
Singer, S. Fred, 42
Sinner, George, 312
Sitkalidak Island, 332
sixties-era dropouts, 403, 404
Skates, Chris, 53n
Skocpol, Theda, 229
Skouries forest (Greece), mining project in, 293–94, 296–98, 303, 314, 342, 347, 445
Slate, 263
slavery, slaves, 154, 177
compensation paid to owners of, 415–16, 457
economic case against, 462
economic impact of, 415–16, 455–57
reparations for, 414–15
see also abolition movement
Slett, Marilyn, 340
Slottje, Helen, 361
smart energy grids, 108
Smart Growth America, 126
Smith, Adam, 173, 462
Smith, Brendan, 401, 402
smog, 176
social democracy, 132, 179
socialism, 38, 40, 75, 159, 177, 184, 210n authoritarian, 44, 178–79
centralization under, 179
Chávez’s “Twenty-first Century,” 182
extractivism and, 178
5-year plans under, 133
social isolation, 105
social justice, 36, 59, 61, 117
social media, in Blockadia movement, 303, 466
social movements, 83, 121, 124, 177, 204–5, 450, 453–57, 459–61, 463–64
social programs, 10, 119
cuts in, 8
Social Security, 454
social spending, cuts in, 8
Society of Petroleum Engineers, 193
Solangi, Moby, 432–33
solar heaters, 393–96

solar panels, solar arrays, 70, 122, 131, 132, 142, 223, 237, 287, 402
global oversupply of, 66n
rooftop, 100
trade restrictions on manufacturers of, 65–69
Solar Pathfinder, 393
solar power, 24, 25, 72, 97, 102, 110, 118, 124, 127, 131, 147, 156, 215, 237, 395, 396
in combined-cycle plant, 129
fracking’s negative impact on, 129, 144
in Ontario, 67–68
private sector and, 100–101
Solar Radiation Management (SRM), 257–61, 277, 282
computer models of, 270–71
Governance Initiative (SRMGI) for, 263
historical record as predictive tool in, 271–75
“proof of harmlessness” argument in, 271, 272
unequal geopolitical risk in, 269, 275–76, 287
untestability of, 269–70
see also Pinatubo Option
solastalgia, 165
Solazyme, 240
solidarity, 62–63
Solnit, Rebecca, 62–63
Solomon, Ilana, 86, 359
Solón, Pablo, 18
Sompeta, India, 350
Soon, Willie, 33
South Africa, 11, 127, 412
apartheid in, 454–55
fracking in, 347, 348
South Asia, 13
Pinatubo eruption and, 272
Southeast Asia, 14
South Korea, 81, 82
South Pacific, 162
Soviet Union, 75, 178
collapse of, 88, 178
see also Russia
space mirrors, 258
Spaceship Earth, 286
Spain, 132, 225
opposition movement in, 9
renewables subsidies cut in, 110
Spatharidou, Dimitra, 132
Spencer, Baldwin, 415
Speth, Gus, 120, 205
Standard & Poor’s, 367–69, 383
Stanford University, 101, 102, 137, 214, 354
Starbucks, 49
starfish, 27–28
“Star Wars” missile defense system, 268n

State Department, U.S., Keystone XL and, 140, 375
Statoil, 130, 179, 198, 246
steam power, 171–74, 266, 410
steamships, 175
Steinberger, Julia, 124
Steingraber, Sandra, 214, 317, 335, 427
Stephen, Marcus, 168
Stern, Nicholas, 88
Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change, 70
Steshia Hubert, Nerida-Ann, 161, 162, 164
stewardship, 169, 383, 444–45
Steyer, Tom, 49, 234–35
Stiglitz, Joseph, 72
stimulus program, 121–22, 124
green initiatives in, 124
Stockholm, 179, 202
Stockholm Environment Institute, 417–18, 465
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, 114
Stockman, Steve, 161
stock market crash of 1929, 10
Stone, Ed, 449
Stone, I. F., 153, 201
storm barriers, 108, 109
Strahl, Chuck, 362
stranded assets, 146
StratoShield, 262, 268n, 271
stratosphere, sulfur dioxide in:
from volcanic eruptions, 258–59, 273–74
see also Pinatubo Option
strontium-90, 203
structural inequity, 40
Stuffed and Starved (Patel), 135
Stutz, John, 94
Suckling, Kierán, 206
Sudan, 270
sulfur dioxide emissions, 208
Suncor Energy, 234, 246
sunlight, reflection of, see Solar Radiation Management
SuperFreakonomics (Levitt and Dubner), 262–63, 271–72
Superfund Act of 1980, 202
super-rich, 19
supply lines, length of, 76
Supreme Court, Canada:
Haida Nation case in, 369
Indigenous land rights affirmed by, 368, 371–72
sustainability, 55, 77, 447
Sustainable Energy Blueprint, 213
Swarthmore College, 355
Swearengin, Paula, 310
Sweden, 179

Swift Boat Veterans for Truth, 34
Swiss Re Americas, 49
SWN Resources, 299
Sydney, Australia, 446
Syngenta, 9
Syriza party (Greek), 181–82, 297
Take, The, 123
Tambococha oil field, 410
tarmac, melting of, 1–2
Tar Sands Blockade, 302
tar sands oil (bitumen), 2, 94, 139, 140, 144, 145, 234, 237, 252–53, 254, 310, 349, 352, 358, 446
call for global moratorium on, 353
diluted (dilbit), 325, 331
grassroots opposition to, 321–22
high risk in, 324
Indigenous opposition to, 322, 375
open-pit extraction of, 329
opposition to, 234
water use in mining of, 346
see also Alberta tar sands; pipelines
tax cuts, 39, 72
for consumers, 112
taxes, 19, 39, 42, 117, 119
airline, 250–51
carbon, 112, 114, 125, 157, 218, 250, 400, 461
corporate, 19, 115
financial transaction, 114
luxury, 93
pollution-based, 284
on the rich, 113–14, 118, 153
transition, 418
tax havens, closure of, 114
Tax Justice Network, 114
tax refunds, 118
Tea Party, 3, 38, 227
technology, 16, 24, 76, 142, 186, 236
and domination of nature, 56–57
extreme extraction and, 310
see also geoengineering
TED Talks, 211, 236
Tellus Institute, 94
temperatures, extreme, 2
Temple, William, 183
Tercek, Mark, 208n
TerraPower, 264
Texaco, 309
Texas:
drought of 2011 in, 47, 440
fracking in, 347

Keystone XL and, 361
water pollution in, 329
Texas, University of, 329
Texas City Prairie Preserve, oil and gas drilling on, 192–95, 196, 215
Thames River, 446
Thatcher, Margaret, 39, 42, 60
Thie, Hans, 131
think tanks, conservative, 38, 203
Third World Network, 77
Thomas-Flurer, Geraldine, 367
Thompson, Lonnie G., 15
Thoreau, Henry David, 184, 286
350.org, 140, 156, 233n, 353, 356
tidal power, 127
Tiger Management, 208
tight-rock formations, 311; see also shale, fracking of Tillerson, Rex, 111, 314
Time magazine, Planet Earth on cover of, 74, 204
Tiputini oil field, 410
Tjelmeland, Aaron, 192, 195
Tongue River, 389, 390
Tongue River Railroad (proposed), 389
tornados, 406
Toronto, 55, 65, 67, 73, 126
Total, 246
Totnes, England, 364
Toyota, 196
trade, see free trade agreements; international trade
trade unions, 81, 83, 177, 204, 454
job creation and, 126–27
job protection by, 126, 178
NAFTA opposed by, 84
transaction tax, 418
TransCanada, 149, 346, 359, 361, 362
see also Keystone XL pipeline
Transition Town movement, 364
Transocean, 330
Trans-Pacific Partnership, 78
transportation infrastructure, 85, 90, 127
travel, wealth and, 113
Treaty 6, 372
tree farms, 222
Trenberth, Kevin, 272, 275
Trent River, 300
trickle-down economics, 19
Trinity nuclear test, 277
triumphalism, 205, 465
Tropic of Chaos (Parenti), 49
tropics, techno-fixes and risk to, 49
Trump, Donald, 3
Tschakert, Petra, 269

Tsilhqot’in First Nation, 345
Tsipras, Alexis, 181–82, 466
Tsleil-Waututh First Nation, 323
Tutu, Desmond, 464
Tuvalu, 13
2 degrees Celsius boundary, 87–88, 89, 150, 354, 456
Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research, 13, 21, 56, 86–87, 214, 283
typhoons, 107, 175, 406, 465
Uganda, 222
ultra-deepwater “subsalt” drilling, 145
Undesirables (Isaacs), 167
unemployment, 180
unemployment insurance, 454
Unified Campesino Movement of Aguán, 222
Union of Concerned Scientists, 201
Clean Vehicles Program at, 237
United Kingdom, 13, 149, 170, 224, 225
compensation of slave-owners in, 415–16, 457
“dash for cash” in, 299
divestment movement in, 354
flooding in, 7, 54, 106–7
fracking in, 299–300, 313
Industrial Revolution in, 172–73, 410
negatives of privatization in, 128
politics of climate change in, 36, 150
supports for renewable energy cut in, 110
Thatcher government of, 39
World War II rationing in, 115–16
United Nations, 7, 18, 64, 87, 114
Bloomberg as special envoy for cities and climate change of, 236
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), 219–20, 224, 226
climate governance and, 280
climate summits of, 5, 11, 65, 150, 165, 200; see also specific summits Department of Economic and
Social Affairs, 110
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, see Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC)
international agreements and, 17
Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food, 135
United Nations Conference on the Human Environment of 1972, 202
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, 377, 383
United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, 180
United Nations Environmental Modification Convention, 278
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), 272
United Nations Framework on Climate Change, 200, 410
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), 76, 77, 78–79
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 167
United Nations Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (1992), 55, 293
United Policyholders, 109
United States, 19, 67, 68, 143

carbon emissions from, 409
coal exports from, 320, 322, 346, 349, 374, 376
Copenhagen agreement signed by, 12, 150
energy privatization reversals in, 98
environmental legislation in, 201–2
failure of climate legislation in, 226–27
Kyoto Protocol and, 218–19, 225–26
oil and gas export restrictions in, 71
opposition movement in, 9
solar energy market in, 72
WTO challenges brought against, 65
WTO challenges brought by, 64–65, 68
United States Climate Action Partnership (USCAP), 226–28
University College London, 415–16
uranium, 176
urban planning, green, 16
urban sprawl, 90, 91
US Airways, 1–2
U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 227
utilities, alternative models for, 130–33
U’wa, 376–77
Vagt, Robert F., 217
van Beurden, Ben, 358, 376
Vancouver, Canada, 13
Var, France, 317–18
Vassiliou, Anni, 347
vegetation, carbon and, 14
Venezuela, 179–80
Venkataraman, R., 75
venture capitalists, 252
Vermont:
anti-fracking movement in, 348
local agriculture in, 404–5
Vernon, Caitlyn, 365
victory gardens, 16, 17
Vidal, John, 244
Vietnam War, 261
Virgin Earth Challenge, 257, 284–85
Virgin Green Fund, 238, 239, 253
Virgin Group, 230, 237
Virgin Airlines, 231, 238, 241–44, 249–52
Virgin Fuels, 238
Virgin Racing, 243
Virgin Trains, 231, 238, 252–53
Viteri, Franco, 388
volcanic eruptions:
droughts and, 272–73
global impact of, 274
weather patterns and, 259, 270, 271–74

Volney, Constantin-François, 273
Vonnegut, Kurt, 286, 287
Vowel, Chelsea, 371
Voynet, Dominique, 218
wage controls, 125
Wallach, Lori, 359–60
Wall Street, 206, 208
in financial crisis of 2008, 9, 44
Wall Street Journal, 207, 312
Walmart, 196, 208–10
Walton, Sam, 209
Walton, Sam Rawlings, 209
Walton Family Foundation, 209
Wang Wenlin, 300
Wania, Frank, 328n
Ward, Barbara, 286
Warsaw climate change summit (2013), 200–201, 276
Washington, D.C.:
Keystone XL protest in, 139, 301–2
record temperatures in, 73
Washington Consensus, 81
Washington State, 319
Indigenous land rights in, 323, 374–75, 380–81
proposed coal export terminals in, 320, 322, 346, 349, 374, 380–81
Washington, Tracie, 419
water:
disruption to supplies of, 14, 165
First Nations and, 384
privatization of, 133
as public utility, 7
water pollution:
extractive industry and, 83, 94, 295, 296, 332, 344–47
from fracking, 328–29, 332, 344, 346
water power, 16, 101, 215
of factories, 171
steam engine vs., 171–72
Waters, Donny, 431, 432
Watt, James, 171–75, 204, 266, 394, 410
Waxman-Markey, 227
wealth:
concentration of, 154, 155
decentralization of, 131
greenhouse gas emissions and, 113–14
inequality of, 123, 454–55
redistribution of, 40, 42, 453
transfers of, 5
Wealth of Nations (Smith), 173, 462
weapons, climate change and, 9
weather, extreme, 35, 102–10

weather futures, 8–9
weatherization, 93
weather patterns:
global warming and, 269
historical record of, 271–76
Pinatubo eruption and, 259, 270, 271–72, 274
variations in, 269
weather patterns, intentional modification of:
as weapon, 261, 278
see also Pinatubo Option; Solar Radiation Management
Weintrobe, Sally, 12
Werner, Brad, 449–50, 451, 460
West Antarctic ice sheet, 13, 14, 15
West Burton, England, 300
Western Australia, 376
West, Thomas, 365
West Virginia, 332, 357n, 367
wetlands, extractive industry damage to, 425–26
Weyerhaeuser, 369
Where Do We Go from Here (King), 453
Whitehead, Andrew, 432
Whitehorn, Will, 230–31
Whitehouse, Mark, 428
Whiteman, Phillip, Jr., 386
Whole Earth Catalogue, 288
WikiLeaks, 78, 165
wilderness system, federal, 203
wildfires, 14, 52, 108, 446
Wildlife Conservation Society, 221–22
Wildlife Society, 192
Willemse, Oom Johannes, 347
Willett Advisors, 216, 235
Williams, Eric, 415
Willis, Rebecca, 90
wind farms, 110, 223, 287
“Window for Thermal Coal Investment Is Closing” (Goldman Sachs), 352
wind power, 16, 67, 70, 97, 102, 118, 122, 124, 127, 131–32, 147, 215, 237
in combined-cycle plant, 129
fracking’s negative impact on, 129, 144n large offshore, 131
manufacturers in, 68
private sector and, 100–101
Wood, Lowell, 268n, 271, 280, 288
Woolsey, R. James, 53
Woolworth, 16
workers, see labor; trade unions
in Industrial Revolution, 171
public sector, 157
work hours, shorter, 93–94
World Academy of Sciences, 257
World Bank, 47–48, 59, 81, 152, 180, 219, 359

austerity promoted by, 77
on carbon tax, 114
free market ideology and, 62
new coal projects opposed by, 348–49
on 2 degrees Celsius limit, 12–13
World Conference Against Racism (2001), 414
World Conference on the Changing Atmosphere, 55, 73–74
World Economic Forum, 112
World Future Council, 97
World Health Organization, 351
world markets, liberation of, 20–21
World People’s Conference on Climate Change and the Rights of Mother Earth, 444n World Resources
Institute, 196, 226
World Trade Organization (WTO), 5, 16, 19, 39, 76, 77, 80, 84
green energy programs challenged by, 64–65, 68–73, 126
worldview:
communitarian, 36, 59, 182, 460, 461, 462, 466
dominance-based, 36–37, 41, 44, 56–57, 59–60, 75, 177, 184, 186, 424, 462
extractivist, see extractivism
regenerative, 23, 25, 60–61, 182, 395, 396, 424, 442–48
World War I, collective sacrifice in, 16, 115
World War II:
collective sacrifice in, 16–17, 115–16
social programs in wake of, 10
World Wildlife Fund, 84, 196, 264
World Wind Energy Association, 132
World Wrestling Entertainment, 212n
Wretched of the Earth, The (Fanon), 459
Wright, Malcolm, 290
Wright, Wayne, 68
Wyoming, 215, 320
Xcel Energy, 98–99
Xeni Gwet’in First Nation, 345
Yale University, 36, 56
Yanza, Luis, 291
Yara, 135
Yasuní-ITT initiative, 410
Yasuní rainforest, 408–11
Yergin, Daniel, 311
Yoshitani, Miya, 155–56
Young, Neil, 383–84
Youngstown, Ohio, 329
zero-carbon energy sources, 18, 128
zero-carbon public services, 19–20
zero-waste design, 16
Zimbabwe, famine in, 272

Simon & Schuster

1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10020
www.SimonandSchuster.com
Copyright © 2014 by Naomi Klein All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or
portions thereof in any form whatsoever. For information address Simon & Schuster Subsidiary Rights
Department, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020.
First Simon & Schuster hardcover edition September 2014
SIMON & SCHUSTER and colophon are registered trademarks of Simon & Schuster, Inc.
The Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to your live event. For more information or to
book an event, contact the Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau at 1-866-248-3049 or visit our website at
www.simonspeakers.com.
Interior design by Joy O’Meara Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Klein, Naomi, 1970–
This changes everything : capitalism vs. the climate / Naomi Klein.—First Simon & Schuster hardcover
edition.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Environmental economics. 2. Environmental policy—Economic aspects. 3. Climatic changes—
Economic aspects. 4. Global environmental change—Economic aspects. 5. Capitalism. I. Title.
HC79.E5K56 2014
363.738'74—dc23

2014013864

ISBN 978-1-4516-9738-4
ISBN 978-1-45169740-7 (ebook)

